                                         3
                    Developmental Processes
                      Ep Heuvelink and Robert C.O. Okello




INTRODUCTION

Growth and development in plants are strongly related, but the interpretation
of plant responses to environmental factors is facilitated by making a distinc-
tion between these two processes. Plant development is defined as a series of
identifiable events resulting in a qualitative (germination, flowering, etc.) or
quantitative (number of leaves, number of flowers, etc.) change in plant struc-
ture. Growth is defined as an irreversible increase in plant or organ dimensions
over time, e.g. length, width, diameter, area, volume and mass (Dambreville
et al., 2015).
      Plant development starts with fertilization. Fertilization, the fusion of
pollen and egg nuclei, produces a diploid zygote, which differentiates into the
embryo, the vital next generation of the plant. Embryo development, or embryo-
genesis, is accompanied by production of storage tissues, such as endosperm or
megagametophyte, and maternal integument layers, which in mature seed be-
come the testa (seed coat). Hormones (e.g. auxin) play important roles in seed
development and maturation. Precocious germination (vivipary) is controlled
by abscisic acid (ABA) during late stages of seed development. However, Wang
et al. (2016) reported vivipary occurring in one accession of tomato rin mutant
fruit not directly associated with ABA, and concluded that hypo-osmolality in
rin fruit may be an important factor in permitting limited viviparous germin-
ation. Single-gene mutations leading to defects in synthesis or sensitivity to
ABA in tomato result in formation of non-dormant seeds (Bewley et al., 2013).
      Developmental processes such as germination, root and leaf development,
inflorescence formation, flower and fruit development all have a strong impact
on tomato yield and are discussed in detail in this chapter. Photoreceptors such
as phytochromes play an important role in the control of plant developmental
processes. Solanum lycopersicum contains five phytochromes: A, B1, B2, E and F
(Eckstein et al., 2016).



© CAB International 2018. Tomatoes 2nd edition (E. Heuvelink)               59
60                          E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello



SEED AND SEED GERMINATION

The seed of a commercial tomato cultivar is a flattened ovoid, up to 5 mm long,
4 mm wide and 2 mm deep, consisting principally of the embryo, endosperm
and testa or seed coat. The testa is covered with large soft hairs, which tend
to bind with other seeds. Thousand-seed weight varies between 2 g (cherry
­tomatoes) and 4 g. One hybrid tomato seed may cost over €0.40, which makes
 it three times more expensive than gold (on a weight basis). Tomato seeds store
 easily and retain their viability for long periods between 5°C and 25°C and a
 fairly wide range of relative humidity (RH), and so no particular special storage
 measures need be taken. James et al. (1964) reported 90% and 59% germin-
 ation after 15 and 30 years of storage, respectively. Mathematical models have
 been developed to predict tomato seed longevity as a function of storage condi-
 tions (e.g. Sinício et al., 2009).
       Germination performance of the seed is influenced by its characteristics,
 for example seed size (more rapid germination is associated with smaller seeds,
 possibly due to a reduced endosperm thickness). Harvesting and extraction of
 tomato seed before full maturity is detrimental to seed viability and germin-
 ation, due to the presence of large numbers of immature seeds, whereas in late
 harvests viviparous germination can be a problem (Demir and Samit, 2001).
 Dias et al. (2006) evaluated tomato seed quality obtained from fruits harvested
 from trusses on the plant at 70 days after anthesis. Fruit weight decreased from
 the first to the sixth truss; however, seeds extracted from fruits of the fourth to
 sixth trusses had, overall, better quality than those from the first to third truss.
 On the same truss, distal fruit tended to produce seeds of higher physiological
 quality than proximal fruit.
       Seed germination is a central process in the generative life cycle of higher
 plants. This complex process is regulated by a large number of environmental
 and endogenous factors. Germination begins with water uptake by the seed
 (imbibition or rehydration) and ends with emergence of the embryonic axis,
 usually the radicle, through the structures surrounding it. Cell elongation
 is necessary, and is generally accepted to be sufficient, for the completion of
 ­radicle protrusion; cell division is not essential. Radicle protrusion is some-
  times referred to as ‘visible germination’ (Bewley et al., 2013). The criterion for
  germination used by physiologists is radicle emergence; seed analysts extend
  this interpretation by classification of seedlings as either normal or abnormal.
  Tomato seed is considered a model system for germination research (Nonogaki,
  2006).
       Quality of seed lots is usually determined by a standard germination test
  conducted under ideal conditions in a laboratory. Both total germination
  ­percentage and uniformity in germination are important characteristics
   of a seed lot. High germination percentages do not necessarily mean high
   emergence in practice, especially under suboptimal, fluctuating field condi-
   tions. For direct-sown tomato crops seed lots with a high vigour, ­indicated by
                             Developmental Processes                          61


more rapid ­germination or greater tolerance of stressful conditions (Bewley
et al., 2013), are essential. Seed vigour differs from germination in that
vigour emphasizes the germination rate (rapid and uniform) and its appli-
cation in forecasting field emergence rather than laboratory performance.
Seed vigour tests can be divided into categories according to ageing, cold,
conductivity, seedling performance and tetrazolium tests (AOSA, 2009).
‘Accelerated ageing’ or ‘controlled deterioration’ tests utilize the extreme
reduction in seed longevity by the combination of high temperature and
high humidity (e.g. 40–50°C and 75–100% RH) to rank seed lots (Bewley
et al., 2013). For greenhouse production, seeds are often germinated in con-
trolled-environment chambers, which guarantee optimal conditions. When
seeds are sown into multiplates or peat pots, a germination percentage of
about 100% normal seedlings is required, as opposed to sowing in seed trays
and transplanting manually, which allows for some selection. Germination
rate can be improved by pre-sowing seed treatments with growth regulators.
Stimulatory effects have been demonstrated for gibberellins (GA) and various
synthetic auxins. Venkatasubramanian and Umarani (2007) evaluated sev-
eral seed priming methods to improve tomato seed performance. Priming
allows the seed water content to be adjusted to a level that permits the seeds –
provided they are freely aerated – to go through all the essential preparatory
process of germination but prevents cell elongation and in consequence rad-
icle emergence. During this waiting period, the less developed or slower seeds
tend to catch up with the faster ones so that subsequent germination is faster
and more uniform.
     In cultivated tomato, seeds are considered non-dormant, whereas some
studies with wild types suggest that ABA plays a role in a slight dormancy. Seed
germination of several GA biosynthesis deficient mutants absolutely depends
on the addition of GA to the medium during imbibition. Physiological, bio-
chemical and genetic evidence suggests a role for GA in weakening the struc-
tures covering the embryo during germination. GA biosynthesis in developing
seeds is involved in embryo growth and the prevention of seed abortion (Kucera
et al., 2005). These authors present an integrated view of the molecular gen-
etics, physiology and biochemistry used to unravel how hormones control seed
dormancy release and germination. ABA is a positive regulator of dormancy
induction and most likely also maintenance, while it is a negative regulator of
germination. GA releases dormancy, promotes germination and counteracts
ABA effects. Ethylene and brassinosteroids (BR) promote seed germination and
also counteract ABA effects.
     Environmental factors strongly influence seed germination. Tomato seeds
characteristically germinate best in the dark; and light will inhibit germination
in some cultivars. These responses are dependent on phytochrome action.
Far-red light has been reported to inhibit germination, whereas red light (at
37°C) promoted germination, suggesting that the presence of Pfr (the far-red
absorbing form of phytochrome) in the seed is a prerequisite for germination.
62                         E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


Phytochromes A and B2 were shown to play specific roles, acting antagonistically
in far-red light (Eckstein et al., 2016). The ability of some light-sensitive culti-
vars to germinate in the dark has been attributed to high levels of Pfr present
in dehydrated seed. Effects of water, salinity and temperature on tomato seed
germination are discussed below.


Water and salinity

Without water, no germination will occur. Water absorption by seeds is char-
acterized by three phases. In the first phase (imbibition), rapid uptake of water
will occur, whether the seed is viable or not. In the following phase, hydration
of the cotyledons may take place but the moisture content of the seed remains
apparently constant. A resurgence in water uptake marks the growth phase
associated with radical protrusion and subsequent growth.
     The rate and degree of water uptake for germination are affected by tem-
perature, water content and salinity. In general, tomato seeds germinate at
soil water potentials ranging from just above the wilting point to field capacity,
though optimum germination is usually obtained at 50–75% field capacity.
Reduced germination at high soil water content is probably caused by reduced
oxygen availability.
     Water stress is often associated with increased soil salinity, which may af-
fect germination in two ways: firstly by creating an osmotic potential that im-
pedes water uptake; and secondly by entry of deleterious ions. High salt levels
tend to decrease tomato seed germination, though tomatoes seem to be more
tolerant of saline conditions during germination than during subsequent
growth.


Temperature

Mathematical models have been developed to describe germination in response to
temperature on the basis of thermal time or heat units (i.e. degree-days). The basis
of thermal time is that the temperature in excess of the minimum temperature
for germination, multiplied by time to a given germination percentage, is a con-
stant. Constant heat units imply a linear relationship between germination rate
and temperature. This seems unlikely for germination of tomato seeds, since op-
timum temperatures between 20°C and 25°C have been reported. However, over
the suboptimal temperature range (13–25°C) this linearity has been observed by
Bierhuizen and Wagenvoort (1974). These authors reported a minimum tem-
perature of 8.7°C for germination and a heat sum requirement of 88 degree-days
to achieve 50% germination, though in a further paper they considered 13°C
as the ‘practical’ minimum temperature for germination (Wagenvoort and
Bierhuizen, 1977). Membrane lipid changes appear to be involved in cultivar
                             Developmental Processes                           63


­differences in the ability to germinate at low temperatures, whereas failure to
 germinate at high temperatures may be due to thermodormancy, a condition
 thought to be related to an interaction between temperature and phytochrome
 action.


LEAF APPEARANCE AND LEAF GROWTH

Leaf appearance or unfolding rate (LUR) is not necessarily equal to the rate
of initiation of leaf primordia at the apex, but, in the long term, equality is
expected. LUR is predominantly influenced by temperature (De Koning,
1994). Since three leaves are initiated between two successive trusses for ‘in-
determinate’ types, LUR rate is simply three times the truss appearance rate.
LUR shows an optimum response to increasing temperature. This relation-
ship is close to linear at 17–23°C and as a rule of thumb three leaves unfold
each week at 20°C. Meristem temperature determines leaf initiation rate and
Savvides et al. (2013) determined that meristem temperature can deviate sub-
stantially (–2.6°C to 3.8°C for tomato) from air temperature under moderate
environments.
      De Koning (1994) observed no effects of fruit load, leaf removal or planting
density on LUR. Heuvelink and Marcelis (1996) also reported little influence of
assimilate supply on LUR (Table 3.1). Higher light interception per plant due
to a lower planting density hardly affected LUR, whereas assimilate supply was
strongly improved. However, Savvides et al. (2014) reported a reduction in leaf
initiation rate in young tomato plants when light level was reduced below 6.5
mol/m2/day (Fig. 3.1). A higher light level could result in a higher meristem
temperature and hence reflect an indirect effect of light on leaf initiation rate,
but Savvides et al. (2014) reported a constant meristem temperature among
the light treatments, and hence reduced leaf initiation rate at low light level
is likely to be determined by the reduction in local photosynthate availability.
This contrast with Heuvelink and Marcelis (1996) may be explained by assimi-
late supply limiting LUR in seedlings, because of the low leaf area and thus low
light interception.
      The size of a compound tomato leaf is immensely variable. Leaves of
greenhouse cultivars are typically 0.5 m long, a little less in breadth, with a
large terminal leaflet and up to eight large lateral leaflets, which may them-
selves be compound. Many smaller leaflets (folioles) may be interspersed with
the large leaflets. Stomata are present on the underside (abaxial side) of the
leaflet and are often present in smaller numbers on the top (adaxial size) (Gay
and Hurd, 1975).
      Leaf size, both area and mass, is influenced by growth conditions
(Table 3.1), with an increased assimilate supply resulting in larger leaves
of higher mass. However, an individual leaf grown under high irradiance
is usually smaller in area but larger in mass. The same is observed under
                                                                                                                                                      64




Table 3.1. Effect of treatment on the number of leaves visible, total dry weight, vegetative dry weight, average area and dry weight of
individual leaves and specific leaf area (SLA) at the end of the experiments with tomato. For the latter three parameters, only the leaves
still on the plant were taken into account. Means within an experiment, followed by the same letter, were not significantly different
(P = 0.05) (Heuvelink and Marcelis, 1996).

                                               No. of leaves          Total dry       Vegetative dry     Leaf area      Leaf dry
Experiment           Treatment                   visible           weight (g/plant)   weight (g/plant)   (cm2/leaf)   weight (g/leaf)   SLA (cm2/g)




                                                                                                                                                      E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello
1                    1.6 plants/m2                  59.5a                636a              256a            467a           3.17a            147a
                     2.1 plants/m2                  60.3a                512b              196b            396b           2.36b            169a
                     3.1 plants/m2                  57.8a                364c              141c            310c           1.61c            193b
2                    1 fruit per truss              68.6a                385a              294a            322a           2.67a            123a
                     3 fruits per truss             71.7a                536b              262a            352a           2.53a            140a
                     7 fruits per truss             69.4a                519b              176b            329a           1.58b            209b
3                    1 fruit per truss              64.8a                414a              341a            494a           3.37a            147a
                     7 fruits per truss             59.3b                444a              210b            503a           2.21b            232b
4                    50% truss removal              62.7a                471a              252a            419a           2.71a            155a
                     Control                        62.3a                488a              182b            320a           1.91b            166a
5                    50% leaf removal1              37.3a                221a              110a            331a           3.22a            104a
                     Control                        37.0a                266b              136a            299a           2.54b            118a
1
    Removal of every other leaf (at a length of 5 cm) above the first truss.
                               Developmental Processes                              65



           Tomato
30




20


                                                      Fig. 3.1. Time course of the
                                                      number of leaves initiated
10                                                    (dashed lines) and unfolded
                                                      (length 10 cm; solid lines) in
                                                      tomato plants grown under
                                                      four diel photosynthetic photon
 0                                                    flux densities (PPFD) (2.5, 4.9,
     0         10         20        30           40   6.5 and 13.2 mol/m2/day).
                    Time (days)                       (Reproduced from Savvides
                                                      et al., 2014, with permission
         2.5        4.9           6.5     13.2
                                                      from CSIRO Publishing.)


enriched carbon dioxide (CO2) conditions. Except in low light conditions,
a higher temperature usually increases the rate of expansion of individual
leaves, but expansion period is decreased relatively more strongly, resulting
in a reduced area per leaf. On the other hand, plant leaf area usually in-
creases with temperature, since LUR increases. Leaf expansion is improved
by a high turgor pressure, which is favoured by a suppressed transpir-
ation rate. Indeed, tomato leaf area increases with humidity but the effect
is small. In the long run, high humidity may cause calcium deficiencies,
which may lead to up to 50% leaf area reduction (Holder and Cockshull,
1990).
     Leaf thickness increases with assimilate supply, resulting in a lower spe-
cific leaf area (SLA) (leaf area per unit of leaf dry mass). This is shown in
Table 3.1 for wider plant spacing and reduced fruit load, but the same has been
reported for increased irradiance (Fan et al., 2013) or elevated CO2 concentra-
tions (Qian et al., 2012). A higher temperature usually decreases leaf thickness
and increases SLA.
     Prolonged periods of surplus assimilates may lead to the so-called short-
leaf syndrome (SLS), i.e. crisp, grey-green to purple-coloured leaves, some-
times with necrotic spots and leaf tips (Nederhoff et al., 1992). These authors
have suggested that SLS results from calcium deficiency in the apex, an in-
direct consequence of a low sink–source ratio resulting in fast-growing or-
gans. Short leaves can be avoided by increasing the plant density, or, in an
early-planted year-round crop, by maintaining an extra shoot on part of the
plants in spring, thus increasing stem density. In both cases the sink–source
ratio is increased.
66                          E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello



STEM DEVELOPMENT

 At the tip of the main stem is the shoot apical meristem (SAM), a region of
 active cell division where new leaves and flower parts are initiated. It is dome-
 shaped and protected by newly formed leaves. Leaves are arranged alternately
 with a 2/5 phyllotaxy. Shoot development in tomato can be separated into two
 different phases. During the initial vegetative phase, the SAM forms metamers
 consisting of an elongated internode, a leaf and a bud (Fig. 3.2). After the for-
 mation of between 7 and 11 metamers, the primary shoot SAM is transformed
 into an inflorescence meristem (IM). While the IM develops into an inflores-
 cence, a second phase of shoot development is initiated by the outgrowth of
 the bud in the axil of the youngest leaf primordium. This sympodial shoot
 grows vigorously, displaces the developing inflorescence to a lateral position
 and transfers its subtending leaf to an elevated position above the inflores-
 cence. After the formation of three leaves, the SAM of the sympodial shoot is
 also transformed into an IM and develops into an inflorescence. The main axis
 is again continued by the sympodial shoot in the axil of the youngest leaf prim-
 ordium. In ‘indeterminate’ cultivars the process is repeated indefinitely with
 inflorescences every three leaves. These types are favoured in greenhouses as
 they produce high yields over an extended period. In ‘determinate’ types each axis
 produces a limited number of inflorescences and strong axillary buds develop
 at the base of the stem, producing a bushy habit, which is ideal for growing
 unsupported in the open. Microscopic studies reveal that axillary buds in tomato
 are formed early in development in all axils of leaf primordia. Due to the weak
 correlative inhibition by the shoot apex, these buds develop into side shoots
 without a resting phase, repeating at least part of the development of the pri-
 mary shoot. As all nodes of a side shoot can again form lateral shoots, this pattern
 can be repeated indefinitely, resulting in a very bushy growth habit (Schmitz
 and Theres, 1999). These side shoots are removed when ‘indeterminate’ culti-
 vars are grown. The side shoot from the leaf axil immediately below an inflor-
 escence is the strongest and can seriously compete with the main apex.
      Cao et al. (2016) subjected tomato plants to night break (NB) treatments
 with different frequencies ranging from every 1, 2, 3 and 4 h using red light
 (RL) with an intensity of 20 μmol/m2/s. These authors showed that with the
increase of RL NB frequency, plant height decreased, stem diameter increased
and flower initiation was delayed (both in days and number of leaves below the
first inflorescence).
      The rate of stem elongation generally increases with temperature, with
stem length primarily determined by day temperature (optimum > 28°C)
(Langton and Cockshull, 1997). Reduction in length growth resulting from
a so-called negative DIF (difference between day and night temperature) has
been reported by many authors and for a large variety of crops, including
­tomato (Fig. 3.3). Bours (2014) concluded that negative DIF affects growth by
 directly affecting the phase and amplitude of circadian clock genes, which in
                               Developmental Processes                            67




                                                     Second
                                                     sympodial unit




                                                     First
                                                     sympodial unit




                                                     Primary
                                                     shoot




                         Tomato


                     Infloral meristem   Flower                Leaf


                             Vegetative side-shoot


Fig. 3.2. Schematic representation of shoot development in tomato. The primary
shoot is illustrated in black, lateral axes of successive order in grey. The primary
shoot meristem forms the first segment of the sympodial stem terminating in the
first inflorescence. In all leaf axils, vegetative side shoots are formed. The side
shoot in the axil of the youngest leaf primordium grows vigorously, pushes the
inflorescence to a lateral position and transfers its subtending leaf to an elevated
position above the inflorescence. After the formation of three nodes the sympodial
shoot also terminates in an inflorescence. Sympodial shoots of progressively higher
order continue the elaboration of the main axis indefinitely. Inflorescences consist
of a series of terminal flowers originating from sympodial inflorescence axes of
progressively higher order. (Reproduced from Schmitz and Theres, 1999, with
permission from Elsevier.)


turn control downstream processes such as starch metabolism and hormone
signalling pathways. Auxin and ethylene signalling pathways affected by nega-
tive DIF show significant crosstalk and interconnect with the circadian clock at
several positions. Bours (2014) stressed the unique position of the photoreceptor
68                          E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello




                 D 16°C                                  D 20°C
                 N 26°C                                  N 22°C

Fig. 3.3. Tomato plants (8 weeks after sowing, 40 days after start of temperature
treatments) grown in climate chambers at a light intensity of 30 W/m2 at three
temperature regimes (D = day temperature; N = night temperature; day length was 12 h).

phytochrome B in this regulation. Gibberellin metabolism is almost certainly
involved in the regulation of stem extension by temperature (Langton and
Cockshull, 1997). The effect of increased root temperature on stem elongation
is relatively small.
     Under daily total irradiances above about 2 MJ/m2/day the heights of
plants of the same dry mass are constant. Reducing daily irradiance below this
level generally increases the rate of stem elongation. The result is a weaker,
thinner but taller stem. CO2 enrichment generally produces taller plants but
this is because of faster growth. Plants of similar dry or fresh mass are slightly
shorter if grown with additional CO2. High humidity improves stem elongation,
though effects are only small. Holder and Cockshull (1990) did not observe
any effect of humidity treatments (0.1, 0.2, 0.4 and 0.8 kPa vapour pressure
deficit, maintained continuously for 28 days) on plant height. Salt stress (high
electrical conductivity (EC) in the root environment) reduces stem elongation.
Shaking both stresses and toughens plants, resulting in a reduced stem length,
a phenomenon known as thigmomorphogenesis (Picken et al., 1986).
     Axillary shoot development is promoted by low temperature, negative DIF
or short days. A period of 5 min of far-red light at the end of a light period has
been shown to suppress side-shoot growth (Tucker, 1976), which may be of
interest for greenhouse crop production, where manual removal of side shoots
demands a lot of labour. In tomato, several mutants are defective in axillary
meristem initiation. The lateral suppressor (ls) mutant is characterized by the
                             Developmental Processes                           69


absence of side shoots, except for the sympodial shoot and the lateral shoot
­immediately below (subfloral side shoots) (Schmitz and Theres, 1999).


ROOT DEVELOPMENT

Tomato seedlings develop a tap root, which can grow longer than 0.5 m but it is
often damaged in culture. About 60% of the root system lies in the top 0.3 m of
soil (Rendon-Poblete, 1980). Adventitious roots, similar in structure to the lat-
erals, develop under favourable conditions from the stem, particularly near the
base. They are also initiated on the underside of horizontal portions of stem,
enabling the plant to re-root in nature.
      Nowadays, many greenhouse tomato cultivations are on artificial sub-
strates, e.g. stone wool, perlite or sometimes in nutrient solution only (nutrient
film technique (NFT)). NFT enables studies of root growth and development,
and both NFT and substrate cultures allow for a much more controlled root
environment. In research focused on roots, sometimes plants are grown in aer-
ated containers with nutrient solution; however, these roots have a different
morphology from those grown in soil.
      Water supply and nutrition have profound effects on plant growth (see
Chapter 6). Roots grown at about 14°C were thicker, whiter and less branched
than at higher soil temperatures, but nutrition influences this response
(Gosselin and Trudel, 1982). Chapter 4 presents effects of root temperature on
dry matter production and partitioning. High humidity may encourage aerial
adventitious root growth.


FLOWERING

Samach and Lotan (2007) summarized progress in understanding the envir-
onmental cues that affect the initial transition to flowering in tomato, and the
genes that are involved in this transition and additional transitions occurring
on the sympodial shoot. Environmental cues discussed were day length, light
intensity and growth temperature. Most of the genes isolated so far seem to play
similar roles in Arabidopsis flowering. This section is largely based on Dieleman
and Heuvelink (1992) and an earlier review on flowering in tomato (Picken
et al., 1985) has been consulted occasionally. In general the tomato plant ini-
tiates at least six to eight leaves preceding the first inflorescence (number of
leaves preceding inflorescence (NLPI)). Inheritance of this characteristic was
found to be simple; one single gene pair determines the NLPI. Complete dom-
inance is suggested for smaller node numbers over large node numbers to the
first inflorescence. The first inflorescence terminates the main axis of growth
and subsequent extension growth is made by the lateral shoot in the axil of the
last initiated leaf (see ‘Stem development’, above).
70                          E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


       There are two flowering types, which are incorrectly termed ­‘determinate’
and ‘indeterminate’. Botanically, both types are determinate since each
i­nflorescence terminates the main axis. Tomato does not respond to seed ver-
 nalization, i.e. NLPI is not reduced by low temperatures applied to imbibed
 seeds. The sensitive period, determining the position on the stem at which the
 first inflorescence will develop, lasts approximately 10 days, starting at coty-
 ledon ­expansion, though this period can be longer depending on the cultivar.
 No single environmental factor can be regarded as critical for the control of
 flowering in tomato. Environmental factors such as light, temperature, CO2,
 nutrition, moisture and growth regulators directly or indirectly influence
 flower initiation.
       The NLPI can be seen as the result of two processes: the rate of leaf initi-
 ation and the time to initiation of the first inflorescence, which determines the
 end of the vegetative phase. The slopes of the lines in Fig. 3.1 indicate the rate
 of leaf initiation. The same rate of leaf initiation can result in a different NLPI,
 if the number of days to initiation of the first inflorescence is different. Also,
 a higher rate of leaf initiation combined with a lower number of days to initi-
 ation of the first inflorescence may result in the same NLPI.


Factors affecting the number of leaves preceding the first inflorescence

A lower temperature, either by day or by night, during the sensitive period of
tomato seedlings causes a smaller NLPI. This effect of mean diurnal tempera-
ture on NLPI is mainly determined by the effect of temperature on the rate
of leaf production. Temperature does not affect the time to flower initiation if
light intensity is high. At low light intensities a higher temperature increases
the time to flower initiation compared with a lower temperature. Root temper-
atures appeared to have little or no effect on the NLPI.
     The rate of leaf production in a tomato seedling increases with increasing
light intensity (Fig. 3.1). On the other hand, the number of days to flower initi-
ation decreases with increasing light intensity, this effect being stronger than
the effect on the rate of leaf production. This results in a lower NLPI at higher
light intensities. Effects of light and temperature on both the rate of leaf initi-
ation and the time to flower initiation, and hence on NLPI, interact. Flowering
in tomato is not usually affected by photoperiod but some cultivars are regarded
as quantitative short-day plants. Several authors have reported a smaller NLPI
with shorter photoperiods.
     CO2 enrichment increases the rate of leaf initiation slightly and ­decreases
the time to flower initiation a little, thus resulting in no clear effect on the
NLPI. Removal of parts of the cotyledons immediately after they had ­unfolded
increases NLPI, the increase being greater the larger the area removed.
Removal of the first two foliage leaves from 6-day-old seedlings reduces the
NLPI, whereas NLPI is not significantly altered by the removal of further
                               Developmental Processes                            71


f­oliage leaves. Generally, the higher the fertilizer level (nitrogen, phosphorus,
 ­potassium (NPK)), the lower is the NLPI. However, flowering is delayed when
  salt or water stress is applied in early stages of development.
       The effects that growth regulators have on the NLPI vary with the method
  of application, the concentration, timing, environment and variety. Application
  of auxins as well as application of gibberellin as a foliar spray cause an increase
  in NLPI. However, application of gibberellin to imbibed seeds does not influ-
  ence NLPI. Application of auxin or gibberellin transport inhibitors decreases
  NLPI; for example, an NLPI as low as 2.4 has been observed after application
  of 10–3 M TIBA (2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid) foliar spray, which inhibits auxin
  transport.
       Most of the observations mentioned above can be explained by nutrient di-
  version hypothesis for flowering (Sachs and Hackett, 1969). According to this
  hypothesis, the amount of assimilate available to the apex during the sensitive
  phase has to reach a certain minimum before flower initiation can take place.
  This level of assimilates is influenced by the assimilate production rate and its
  distribution. Factors that increase the total amount of assimilates in the plant as
  well as those increasing the competitive potential of the apex decrease the NLPI.


Appearance rate of new trusses

Most tomato cultivars develop ‘units’, comprising three leaves and internodes,
terminated by an inflorescence, which build up the sympodial stem (Fig. 3.2).
Hence, appearance rate of new inflorescences (trusses), following the first in-
florescence on the sympodial stem, often called the flowering rate, is one-third
of leaf appearance rate (see ‘Leaf appearance and leaf growth’, pp. 63–65,
this volume). This means that the description of environmental effects on
leaf appearance rate also holds for truss appearance rate. Thus, truss appear-
ance rate after the first truss is predominantly determined by temperature.
De Koning (1994) observed an almost linear response between temperature
(range 17–23°C) and truss appearance rate (0.11–0.15 trusses per day). Truss
appearance rate is equally related to day and night temperature and therefore
responds to the 24 h mean temperature. No effects of fruit load, leaf removal or
plant density on truss appearance rate have been observed (De Koning, 1994).
Hence, sink–source ratio has no significant influence on truss appearance rate
in tomato. Also, root temperature, EC in the root environment, air CO2 concen-
tration and air humidity hardly affect truss appearance rate.


FLOWER DEVELOPMENT, POLLINATION AND FRUIT SET

Once a tomato plant has terminated its vegetative phase, several processes fol-
lowing the initiation of an inflorescence determine whether fruits will start
72                               E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


to grow. Flower buds have to develop into flowers, pollination and fertilization
have to be successful and fruit set should occur (Fig. 3.4). All of these processes
are considered in the present section, mainly based on Chapters 4 and 5 of the
tomato book by Atherton and Rudich (1986) and a review on pollination and
fruit set by Picken (1984).


Inflorescence size and flower bud abortion

The number of flowers initiated in an inflorescence depends on cultivar and
environmental conditions. The inflorescence is a monochasial cyme in which
the vegetative axis terminates in the king flower (Picken et al., 1985). Increased
irradiance or decreased plant density and decreased temperatures positively in-
fluence the number of flowers formed in an inflorescence, with the tempera-
ture effect being larger at high irradiance compared with low irradiance. Low
air temperatures (< 10°C) during inflorescence initiation promote inflores-
cence branching, usually resulting in more flowers per inflorescence. It is the
mean diurnal temperature, rather than day or night temperature alone, that


                                                   Flowers per                      Initial number
                                                      truss                         of flower buds
                                                                                       per truss
                Rate of flower
                  formation

                                                                                 Flower bud
      Flower                                                                      abortion
     abortion
                                 Fruits set
                                                                 Rate of truss
                                                                  formation


      Fruit                Growing fruits
     abortion



                                                    Fruit
                                              development rate



                             Ripe fruits


Fig. 3.4. A relational diagram of the number of growing fruits on an indeterminate
tomato plant (De Koning, 1994).
                             Developmental Processes                           73


controls branching and flower number (Hurd and Cooper, 1967). Similar to air
temperature, a reduction in root temperature promotes the number of flowers
in the first inflorescence. Inflorescence size is reduced when plants are grown
under restricted water supply or in small pots containing a small volume of
growing medium. Photoperiod or CO2 level show no influence on the number
of flowers formed in an inflorescence.
     Flower development after initiation is primarily influenced by tempera-
ture: higher temperatures result in faster flower development. Increased day
temperatures are reported to be more effective in promoting flower develop-
ment than corresponding increases in night temperatures.
     Especially under conditions where photosynthesis is low (low light in-
tensities, low CO2 and/or short days), increased temperatures will stimulate
flower bud abortion. High temperature effects on flower abortion may be a
consequence of failure of fruit set rather than a direct effect of temperature
(see below). Overall it appears that low assimilate availability during flower de-
velopment stimulates abortion of flower buds. Furthermore, when plants are
grown at the same total daily irradiance, flower bud abortion is more evident
in long days than in short days.


Pollination

Fruit set, defined here as the proportion of open flowers that subsequently set
fruit of a marketable size, may fail for many reasons. Flower/fruit abortion is
defined as the proportion of flowers that fail to yield fruit of marketable size
and hence fruit set is one minus abortion. In tomato, flower abortion occurs
frequently, whereas fruit abortion is uncommon, though sometimes distal
fruits stop growing at a small size and never ripen. Failure of pollen produc-
tion (number and viability of pollen) or pollination, pollen germination, pollen
tube growth, ovule production, fertilization or fruit swelling all may result in
poor fruit set. However, poor fruit set in low light conditions is most frequently
caused by failure of pollen production or pollination.
     The potential number of pollen grains is genetically determined. For ex-
ample, some modern TMV-resistant cultivars, containing the Tm-2 gene, pro-
duce less pollen of a slightly lower viability. Pollen development is adversely
affected by low light. At severe carbohydrate deficiency, meiosis is abnormal
in some pollen mother cells. With less severe carbohydrate stress, pollen de-
velopment is variable. When microspore development ceases at an early stage,
pollen grains are shrunken and irregular, whereas when microspore devel-
opment proceeds normally until after mitotic division, the pollen grains are
morphologically perfect. Abnormal flowers with rudimentary petals, stamens
and pistils produced under low light produce sterile pollen. High temperature
(40°C) damages pollen, the most critical stage for pollen development being
meiosis, which occurs about 9 days before anthesis in plants grown at 20°C.
74                         E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


In contrast, meiosis appears unaffected by low temperature. A day/night tem-
perature of 32°C/26°C compared with 28°C/22°C did not cause a significant
change in the number of pollen grains produced; however, it significantly
decreased the number of fruit set, pollen viability and the number of pollen
grains released (Sato et al., 2006). Failure of tomato fruit set under a moder-
ately increased temperature above optimal was due to the disruption of sugar
metabolism and proline translocation during the narrow window of male re-
productive development. Also failures in anther dehiscence at high temperat-
ures have been mentioned (Arrizumi et al., 2013). Literature reports conflict
where possible decrease in pollen quality at low temperatures is concerned,
possibly because of interactions with light and root temperature.
     Pollination, the successful transfer of pollen grains to the stigmatic surface,
depends on pollen release, flower characteristics and pollen grain adherence to
the stigma. Although pollen is mature and ready for transfer at anthesis, the
stigma becomes receptive about 2 days previously and remains so for up to 4 days
or more. All modern cultivars are self-pollinated. Flowers are not frequently
visited by insects, since they do not produce nectar. Air movement in the field is
enough to stimulate self-pollination but wind speed in greenhouses is too low. In
greenhouses, pollination is promoted by vibrating each truss mechanically with
an electric ‘bee’ two or three times a week, or, more recently, by the introduction
of bumblebees. It is most effective in winter to vibrate flowers at around midday,
maybe as a consequence of the higher temperature and irradiance at this time.
However, tomato flowers close at night and open during the day, which may also
contribute to the increased effectiveness of vibration at midday.
     At high humidities, pollen tends to remain inside the anthers, whereas at
low humidities it may not adhere to the stigma. However, the effects of rela-
tive humidity between 50% and 90% are small. Pollination can be adversely
affected by abnormalities in flower structure. For self-pollination, the stigma
must lie within the tip of the anther cone. Stigma exsertion beyond the cone
enables the pollen to escape before reaching the stigma, and it may also lead
to desiccation of the stigmatic surface. The length of the style is both genetic-
ally determined and affected by growing conditions. Low light, high nitrogen
levels and high temperature have been shown to increase stigma exsertion.
Other structural defects that reduce fruit set include, for example, poor devel-
opment of the endothecum at higher temperature, which is essential for dehis-
cence, and splitting of the staminal cone and/or fasciation of the style at low
light. Pollen adherence to the stigmatic surface depends not only on relative
­humidity (see above) but also on temperature, 17–24°C being optimal.


Germination of pollen grains and fertilization

Pollen germination depends on pollen viability and environmental factors.
The time taken for pollen to germinate decreases with increasing temperature.
                              Developmental Processes                            75


The germination percentage is greatly reduced at temperatures outside the
range 5–37°C. The growth rate of the pollen tube increases with temperature
between 10°C and 35°C but is reduced outside this range. Sato et al. (2000)
concluded from their work that cultivar differences in pollen release and ger-
mination under heat stress are the most important factors determining their
ability to set fruit. Humidity and light only marginally affect pollen tube growth.
     Low light may reduce the size of flowers and ovaries, and ovule develop-
ment may cease under such conditions before or soon after embryo sac for-
mation. Ovule viability may be adversely affected by high temperature (40°C)
5–9 days before anthesis at about the time of meiosis in the ovule mother cells.
     Fertilization takes place once the nuclei from the pollen tubes penetrate
viable ovules. Because of an increased tube growth rate, higher temperatures
reduce the time to fertilization. Fertilization is not greatly affected by growth
conditions, though exposure to high temperature (40°C) can have adverse ef-
fects on fertilization and on processes that immediately precede or follow it. For
example, the endosperm can deteriorate at high temperature 1–4 days after
pollination.


Fruit initiation

Fruit set is positively correlated with assimilate availability, which may be
expressed as the source–sink ratio in the plant (Fig. 3.5). Tomato fruit set
depends on successful pollination and fertilization, which trigger the fruit de-
velopmental programme through activation of auxin and gibberellin signal-
ling pathways. However, the role of each of these two hormones is still poorly
understood. De Jong et al. (2009) reviewed the role of auxin and gibberellin in
tomato fruit set and presented a model integrating the role of both hormones.
The level of cytokinines is up-regulated 5 days after anthesis, suggesting a posi-
tive correlation between cytokinines and cell division. Application of synthetic
cytokinin to pre-anthesis ovaries resulted in parthenocarpic fruit formation
by activating cell division (Matsuo et al., 2012). The precise role of seeds in
the initiation of fruit growth in tomato has not been determined, though it
has been suggested that they may be sources of auxin, which stimulates fruit
swelling. Gibberellins are also involved in fruit growth initiation, for high levels
of endogenous gibberellins in the ovaries have been observed in cultivars that
exhibit parthenocarpy. The genetic background of parthenocarpy in tomato is
discussed in Chapter 2.


FRUIT DEVELOPMENT

Like most developmental processes, the rate at which an initiated fruit pro-
gresses towards ripeness is primarily dependent on temperature. The relation
76                                                      E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


                                         6

                                        5.5




       Number of set fruits per truss
                                         5

                                        4.5

                                         4

                                        3.5

                                         3

                                        2.5

                                         2
                                              0   0.2         0.4          0.6           0.8   1
                                                            Real growth/potential growth

Fig. 3.5. Number of set fruits on the first nine inflorescences of beefsteak
tomato ‘Capello’, grown in CO2-enriched () or non-enriched (•) polycarbonate
greenhouses, as a function of the ratio between real and potential fruit growth
calculated at fruit set of each inflorescence, pruned to seven flowers. (Reprinted,
with permission, from Bertin, 1995, Annals of Botany, 75.)


between fruit developmental stage and fruit growth rate is also presented here
and the genetic control of fruit development is discussed. First, fruit morph-
ology and anatomy are considered. Main references for this section are Chapter
5 of Atherton and Rudich (1986) and the dissertations of De Koning (1994)
and Okello (2015).


Fruit morphology, anatomy and development rate

Botanically, a tomato fruit is a berry consisting of seeds within a fleshy pericarp
developed from an ovary. Fruits of the cultivated species (Solanum lycopersicum)
have two to several carpels and final masses from a few to several hundred
grams. Based on the number of carpels, cultivars are grouped as: round to-
matoes (two to three carpels), beefsteak tomatoes (more than five carpels) and
the nowadays popular intermediate types (three to five carpels). Tomato fruits
are composed of flesh (pericarp walls and skin) and pulp (placenta and locular
tissue including seeds) (Fig. 3.6). In general, the pulp accounts for less than
one-third of the fruit fresh mass. Covering the epidermis is a thin cuticle.
     The period between anthesis and fruit maturity decreases with increasing
averaged temperature from 14°C to 26°C, with a small effect of DIF (De Koning,
                               Developmental Processes                                 77


(a)
      Epidermis (e)                                                   Outer wall of
                                                                      pericarp (p)


      Seeds (s)                                                       Radial wall of
                                                                      pericarp (rp)



      Locular cavity (lc)                                             Columella (c) or
      with jelly-like                                                 inner wall of
      parenchyma                                                      pericarp
      around seeds


                                                                      Placental
      Vascular bundles (vb)                                           tissue (pl)



(b)
              (e)                                                       (p)



        (s)
                                                                        (rp)




      (c)


       (lc)
                                                                        (pl)
            (vb)

Fig. 3.6. Anatomy of tomato fruits with (a) bilocular or (b) multilocular structure
shown as transverse sections (copyright Glasshouse Crops Research Institute).


1994). The fruit growth period can be well described by linearly relating its
reciprocal (i.e. fruit development rate) to temperature (Fig. 3.7). This means for
harvest-ripe fruits a certain temperature sum has to be reached. This concept
of heat units has been explained in the section on germination (pp. 60–63, this
volume). For cv. ‘Counter’, accurate predictions of fruit growth period may be made
assuming a temperature sum of 940 degree-days and a base temperature of 4°C.
However, the temperature sensitivity of the fruit development rate varies during
fruit development, being high during the first weeks after anthesis when cell div-
ision and elongation take place, and then decreasing when only cell elongation
occurs. When the fruit is close to maturity, increasing temperature enhances
78                                                               E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


                                 2.6


                                 2.4                                                44

                                                                       34




Fruit development rate (%/day)
                                                                       34
                                 2.2
                                                                        5
                                                                       25
                                                                       255
                                  2
                                                             5                                    Fig. 3.7. Relationship
                                                     3                                            between temperature
                                                      3      5
                                 1.8                4        1
                                                             2                                    and fruit development
                                                    5        2
                                                     5                                            rate of tomato for five
                                                   2                                              experiments: (1) cv.
                                 1.6               2
                                                                                                  ‘Counter’ in spring;
                                                                                                  (2) cv. ‘Calypso’ in
                                 1.4     22                                                       spring; (3) cv. ‘Counter’
                                                                                                  in summer; (4) cv.
                                 1.2                                                              ‘Calypso’ in summer;
                                    16        18         20     22       24         26      18    (5) cv. ‘Liberto’ in spring
                                                           Temperature (°C)                       (De Koning, 1994).


fruit ripening (De Koning, 1994). Other factors, such as plant density, light
intensity, CO2, air humidity, fruit load, plant age or salinity in the root envir-
onment, have no or only a small effect on fruit growth period. Severe water
stress shortens the duration of fruit growth period and fruit affected by blos-
som-end rot will ripen 1–2 weeks earlier. Fruit ripening is considered in detail
in Chapter 5.
      Fruits grown under source limitation reach the potential growth rate,
i.e. growth rate under non-limiting assimilate supply, about 2 weeks after the
source limitation has been lifted by severe fruit pruning (Fig. 3.8). This is an
interesting observation, as apparently it is the fruit developmental stage that
determines its potential growth rate and not the fruit size, which reflects the
history of assimilate availability experienced by the fruit.


Genetic control of fruit development

Tomato fruit development is a four-phase process (Fig. 3.9) that begins with
initiation of the floral meristem, carpel formation and ovary growth. The se-
cond phase involves pollination, fertilization, fruit set and resumption of cell
division. During the third phase, cells expand and undergo endoreduplica-
tion. Initiation of ripening is the fourth phase and it marks the beginning of
fruit senescence. Reviews by Arrizumi et al. (2013), Karlova et al. (2014) and
Azzi et al. (2015) on fruit development have been consulted in writing up this
section.
                                         Developmental Processes                  79


                          12


                          10


                           8




 Fruit dry mass (g)
                           6


                           4


                           2


                           0
                                0   10     20         30            40    50     60
                                          Number of days after anthesis


                          0.4




                          0.3




 Growth rate (g DM/day)
                          0.2




                          0.1




                          0.0
                                0   10     20         30            40    50     60
                                          Number of days after anthesis

Fig. 3.8. Tomato (cv. ‘Counter’) fruit growth rate as a function of days after
anthesis. Fruits were grown with one (�), two () or eight () fruits per truss, or
seven fruits were removed from each truss from plants with eight fruits per truss at
18 days after anthesis (¸). Growth was calculated from diameter measurements on
the second and third fruit on the fourth truss (Heuvelink and Wubben, unpublished
data, 1999).
80                                   E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello



      Phase 1: Floral initiation, carpel                Phase 2: Pollination, fruit set and restart of
      formation and growth                              cell division
            AG                                           Aux/IAA         SlIAA17           TIR1



        WUS             Floral meristem growth             ARF           Ovary growth resumption
                                                           PIN
         IMA            Carpel primordial size

                                                       KRP1 SIM/SMR            DELLA              GA
        TAG1
                         Carpel identity
       TAGL1

                                                      CYC-CDK            Post anthesis cell division
     SPL/SPB             Carpel number

                                                      APC/C        DEL         E2Fb           RBR
         FAS
                         Locule number
          LC


       Phase 3: Cell expansion                           Phase 4: Fruit ripening

        AGPaseB AGPS1               TIV1                RIN           CNR



                                                        ACS     ACO    PSY1 TAGL1 NOR
             Sucrose import

            delta-TIP        PIP1
                                                              Ethylene biosynthesis

             Water import
                                                                                                  ETR
                                                              SlAP2      SlMADS1


             Cell wall elasticity                              Ethylene signalling                CTR1

                                       UDP-G-PPase
     XTH6        BR1 EXP UDP-G-4-epi                    NEVER-           ERF         EIL          EIN2
                                                        RIPE


Fig. 3.9. Schematic representation of transcriptional regulation of the four phases
of tomato fruit development: (1) floral initiation, carpel formation and growth;
(2) pollination, fruit set and restart of cell division; (3) cell expansion; (4) fruit
ripening. Lines ending with an arrow represent a positive feedback; blocked lines
represent negative feedback. Abbreviations are explained in the text.


Phase 1: Floral initiation, carpel formation and ovary growth
Tomato flower induction occurs when the shoot apical meristem (SAM) is
converted into an inflorescence meristem that produces floral meristems
(FM). Unlike SAM, the FM exhibits determinate growth through repression
of WUSCHEL (WUS) by AGAMOUS (AG) gene encoded transcription f­actors.
                             Developmental Processes                         81


WUS promotes cell division and prevents premature differentiation. The FM
produces four floral whorl primordia, sepals, petals, stamens and carpels. The
fourth innermost whorl, the carpel primordium, fuses to form the ovary with
locules that contain ovules. Carpel primordial size is regulated by INHIBITOR
OF MERISTEM ACTIVITY (IMA). Overexpression of IMA causes formation of
small carpel primordia and ultimately small flowers and fruits. Carpel identity
is controlled by TOMATO AGAMOUS 1 (TAG1) and TOMATO AGAMOUS-LIKE
1 (TAGL1). Knock-down of TAG1 causes defects in stamens, loss of deter-
minacy, and production of flowers-in-flowers or fruit-in fruit-­phenotype, while
knock-down of TAGL1 causes style trichome loss and production of a thin
pericarp. Another group of carpel number regulators consists of SQUAMOSA
promoter binding protein-like (SPL/SPB) transcription factors. Knock-down
mutants of these transcription factors produce extra carpels and fruit-like
structures at the fruit stylar end. The tomato fruit is a multi-carpelar berry
and its size is dependent on locule number. The largest variation in locule
number has so far been attributed to two transcription factor encoding genes,
FASCIATED (FAS) and LOCULE NUMBER (LC). The mutant forms ( fas and lc)
present in most large-fruited domestic tomato are responsible for high locule
number.

Phase 2: Flower pollination, fertilization of ovules, fruit set and re-start of
cell division
Before anthesis, cell division in the ovary ceases temporarily. Following
successful pollination and fertilization, cell division resumes (fruit set) due
to auxin and gibberellic acid (GA) biosynthesis. Auxin transporters (PIN-
FORMED (PIN)) and receptors (TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1
(TIR1)) are important during fruit set, development and growth. Mounet
et al. (2012) have shown that mutant tomato plants with silenced SlPIN4
gene produce small parthenocarpic fruits. TIR1 controls degradation of
AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (Aux/IAA) transcriptional repressors in
the presence of auxin, leading to release of auxin response factors (ARFs).
Parthenocarpic fruits are formed when TIR1, Aux/IAA and ARF genes are
mis-expressed. Larger fruits form when transcriptional repressors of auxin
transporters or receptors are silenced. Su et al. (2014) have shown that
when the repressor (SlIAA17) of Aux/IAA was silenced in tomato, larger
fruits with thick pericarp were formed. Development of unpollinated ovaries
is usually inhibited through reduced expression of genes encoding GA bio-
synthesis enzymes. Transcript levels of these genes (e.g. those encoding GA
20-oxidases) increase after successful pollination, leading to synthesis of ac-
tive GA1 and GA4. GA interacts with its receptor (GA INSENSITIVE DWARF1
(GID1)) to target DELLA proteins for proteolytic degradation, hence release
of GA-responsive gene repression. Silencing of SlDELLA1 and repression of
SlGA20ox1 causes production of pollen with reduced viability and small
elongated facultative parthenocarpic fruits.
82                         E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


     Following fruit set, cell division proceeds for about 2 weeks but can be longer
(up to 25 days after anthesis) in some cultivars. Cell division is a four-phase
process consisting of DNA synthesis (S) and mitosis (M) and two gap phases.
During M phase, a cell divides into two. Newly formed cells expand during gap
phase 1 (G1) in preparation for S phase, when cellular DNA content doubles.
S phase is followed by a second gap phase (G2) in which cell size doubles in prep-
aration for M phase. Phase transition is regulated by catalytic cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDK) that are dependent on cyclins (CYC) for activation. Cyclins deter-
mine CYC–CDK complex stability, localization and substrate specificity. Seven
CDKs and eight CYCs have been reported in tomato (Czerednik, 2012). Activity
of the CYC–CDK complex can be modified by (i) proteolytic destruction of the
CYC subunit (e.g. by the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)),
and (ii) inactivation by CDK inhibitors (e.g. SIM/SMR, WEE1 and Kip-related
protein 1 (KRP1)). Cell cycle regulation can be upstream of CYCs and CDKs
through transcription factors. E2F transcription factors are upstream cell cycle
regulators that target genes (DEL) involved in DNA repair and chromatin dy-
namics at the transition between G1 and S. The RETINOBLASTOMA-RELATED
(RBR) protein binds the E2Fb transcription factor to prevent cell cycle progres-
sion. G1 to S phase transition occurs when CYC–CDK dimers phosphorylate
RBR and release E2F transcription factors. Some proteins (e.g. FW2.2) inhibit
cell division but their mode of action is still elusive. FW2.2 accounts for up to
30% of the variation in fruit fresh weight of domesticated and wild tomato.
FW2.2 gene expression decreases in tomato fruits when they are grown at
high temperature (Okello et al., 2015).

Phase 3: Cell expansion and endoreduplication
Cell expansion is a process that starts after fruit set and continues until the end
of fruit growth. By the end of fruit growth, mesocarp cells can attain a size that
is 30,000 times that of cells at anthesis. This increase in cell size is caused by
import of water and sucrose, and accumulation of macromolecules and organ-
elles. Imported sucrose is broken down into glucose and fructose by vacuolar
acid invertase. Glucose molecules are used in the formation of ADP glucose, the
building blocks of starch. ADP glucose formation is catalysed by ADP glucose
pyrophosphorylase (ADPGPP) while starch synthase catalyses starch forma-
tion from ADP glucose. ADPGPP consists of a large and small subunit encoded
by AGPS1 and AGPaseB respectively. Towards the end of fruit growth, starch is
broken down into fructose and glucose in a reaction catalysed by starch phos-
phorylase. The expression of genes encoding these enzymes markedly influ-
ences fruit growth. Silencing of the gene (TIV1) encoding vacuolar invertase
biosynthesis, for example, causes reduced fruit size, high sucrose but low fruc-
tose and glucose content. Guan and Janes (1991) demonstrated remarkable dif-
ferences in fruit size of in vitro grown fruits exposed to light or darkness. They
attributed the large fruit phenotype observed in light to higher rates of starch
accumulation due to activation of ADPGPP by light.
                               Developmental Processes                            83


      Water uptake during cell expansion is driven by an osmotic potential gra-
dient caused by carbohydrate accumulation. Water channels (aquaporins)
f­acilitate water entry into cells. The expression of two aquaporin encoding
 genes (delta-tonoplast integral protein (delta-TIP); plasma membrane intrinsic
 protein (PIP1)) increases between 28 and 42 days after anthesis (Prudent et al.,
 2010). Cell expansion following water and carbohydrate uptake depends on
 cell wall elasticity. Therefore factors influencing cell wall elasticity such as new
 cell wall deposition, composition, bonding between wall components and en-
 zymatic modification of the wall significantly affect cell expansion. Expansin
 (EXP) genes encode proteins that act as a molecular grease between wall com-
 ponents, thereby increasing cell wall elasticity. Prudent et al. (2010) studied
 the expression of two cell wall synthesis associated genes (UDP-glucose-4-
 epimerase (UDP-G-4-epi); UDP-glucose-pyrophosphorylase (UDP-G-PPase))
 and three cell wall degradation genes (polygalacturonase (PG) and two xylo-
 glucan endotransglycosylases (XTH6 and BR1)) in tomato. Their findings
showed that under non-source-limiting conditions, UDP-G-4-epi expression
increases with fruit maturity but declines towards ripening. The expression
of PG is similar to that of UDP-G-4-epi except that no decline in expression
is ­observed towards ripening. Expression of UDP-G-PPase, on the other hand,
does not change while that of XTH6 and BR1 drops initially and levels off
during fruit development.
      Cell expansion in tomato fruit is positively correlated with endoreduplica-
tion, a modified cell cycle in which cells undergo a repeated gap and DNA syn-
thesis phase leading to ploidy levels ranging between 4C and 512C (where C is
the haploid DNA content in picograms). Inhibitors of the CYC–CDK complex
such as WEE1, KRP1, SIAMESE (SIM)/SIAMESE-RELATED (SMR) proteins pro-
mote endoreduplication. Promotion of endoreduplication also occurs through
inhibitory competition between E2F transcription factors. For example, E2Fc
transcription factors inhibit activity of the cell cycle promoting DEL1 when
they occupy the DNA binding site occupied by E2Fb during the normal cell
cycle. Endoreduplication causes an increase in nuclear size. A positive effect
of endoreduplication on transcription has also been shown in some studies. It
is thought that the positive correlation between ploidy level and cell size stems
from a causal relationship between nuclear and cytoplasmic growth as pro-
posed in the karyoplasmic ratio theory.

Phase 4: Ripening
Ripening marks the beginning of senescence. It involves a change in colour from
green to red or yellow. Colour change is associated with accumulation of caroten-
oids which results from breakdown of the thylakoid membrane in chloroplasts.
Dark-grown fruit are white due to lack of chloroplasts but they contain organ-
elles (etioplasts and amyloplasts) that are capable of carotenoid accumulation
and red colour formation during ripening. Expression of carotenoid biosynthesis
genes (e.g. PHYTOENE SYNTHASE (PSY1)) increases during ripening. PSY1
84                         E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


catalyses the first step in the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway and is a ­precursor
for the red pigment, lycopene. Flavonoids and anthocyanin also accumulate in
the fruit peel during ripening and significantly affect fruit colour.
     Tomato fruit are climacteric, hence they exhibit marked increase in
respiration and ethylene production at the onset of ripening. Ethylene
production begins with conversion of S-adenosymethionine (SAMe) to
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) by ACC synthase (ACS).
ACC is then converted into ethylene in a reaction catalysed by ACC oxi-
dase (ACO). Regulation of ripening via ethylene signalling occurs through
ethylene biosynthesis and perception by receptors. Important regu-
lators in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway include MADS-domain pro-
tein RIPENING INHIBITOR (RIN), COLORLESS NON-RIPENING (CNR),
and NAC domain transcription factor encoded by the gene underlying the
non-ripening (nor) mutation. Mutants (rin and cnr) in which RIN and CNR
expression are suppressed produce fruits that are unable to ripen. Fruits of
these mutants neither produce elevated levels of ethylene nor respond to
exogenous ethylene application.
     RIN regulates autocatalytic ethylene production genes and plays a role
in aroma formation by regulating LIPOXYGENASE (LOX) genes. The rin mu-
tants exhibit suppressed expression of two genes, SlACS2 and SlACS4, in-
volved in autocatalytic ethylene production. RIN also interacts with other
ripening-promoting transcription factors, for example TOMATO AGAMOUS-
LIKE 1 (TAGL1) and FRUITFUL 1 and 2 (FUL1/TDR4 and FUL2/MBP7).
TAGL1 induces autocatalytic ethylene production while effects of FUL1 and
FUL2 are ethylene independent (Bemer et al., 2012). Surprisingly, RIN ap-
pears to play a role in negative regulation of ethylene biosynthesis through
promotion of the expression of two genes (SlAP2a and SlMADS1) that nega-
tively influence fruit ripening. Plants in which SlAP2a is repressed produce
ripe fruits that are orange in colour, faster senescence and high levels of
ethylene production. Expression of SlMADS1 is high in mature green fruits
but decreases as fruits ripen. Plants with silenced SlMADS1 produce fruits
that ripen earlier and produce more ethylene compared with the wild type.
CNR, on the other hand, up-regulates the expression of ripening-related
genes like PSY1, LOX and ACO1. Mutants (cnr) are incapable of carotenoid
biosynthesis because they lack phytoene and other carotenoid precursors.
However, CNR also promotes expression of a negative regulator of ethylene
biosynthesis, SlAP2. The final step in ethylene biosynthesis requires activity
of ACO. Silencing of its transcription factor, LeHB-1, reduces expression
of LeACO1, leading to inhibition of ripening. Another recently discovered
gene (SlNAC4) appears to be a positive regulator of ripening (Zhu et al.,
2014). Suppression of its expression results in fruits with delayed ripening,
­decreased ethylene biosynthesis, suppressed chlorophyll degradation and
 reduced carotenoid phenotype.
                             Developmental Processes                            85


     Ethylene receptors are encoded by ETHYLENE RESPONSE (ETR)
genes. ETR genes play a role in ethylene signalling by removing the block
on ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 2 (EIN2) exerted by CONSTITUTIVE TRIPLE
RESPONSE 1 (CTR1). The released EIN2 promotes EIN3/EIN3-like (EIL) tran-
scription factor gene activity which activates transcription of ETHYLENE
RESPONSE FACTORS (ERFs). In general, ERFs positively mediate ethylene sig-
nalling. For example, LeERF1 positively mediates ethylene signalling while
Sl-ERF.B3 is active in feedback mechanisms that regulate ethylene produc-
tion and responses. Other genes that regulate ripening via ethylene signal
transduction include ethylene receptor genes, NEVER-RIPE, ETR6 and
GREEN-RIPE.


SUMMARY

•   Germination rate depends linearly on temperature in the suboptimal tem-
    perature range, with a minimum temperature of 8.7°C and a heat sum
    requirement of 88 degree-days; 13°C is considered a ‘practical’ minimum
    temperature for germination.
•   Leaf and truss appearance rate and fruit development rate depend linearly
    on temperature (range 17–23°C) and show hardly any influence of as-
    similate supply (e.g. light intensity, CO2 concentration, fruit load, plant
    density or removal of just-unfolded leaves).
•   Number of leaves below the first inflorescence correlates negatively with
    assimilate availability to the apex during a sensitive phase (approximately
    the first 10 days from cotyledon expansion).
•   Fruit set is positively correlated with assimilate availability, and both auxin
    and gibberellins play a role. Poor fruit set under high or low temperatures
    results from poor pollen quality.
•   The identity of tomato carpels is regulated by TOMATO AGAMOUS 1
    (TAG1) and TOMATO AGAMOUS-LIKE 1 (TAGL1) genes.
•   Locule number is a major determinant of fruit size. Variation in fruit size
    is attributed to two transcription factors FASCIATED (FAS) and LOCULE
    NUMBER (LC).
•   Fruit set is dependent on genes encoding auxin transporters (PIN) and re-
    ceptors (TIR1).
•   Cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases orchestrate cell division during early
    tomato fruit growth.
•   Genes that regulate carbohydrate metabolism, endoreduplication and
    aquaporins determine the extent of cell expansion.
•   Tomato fruit ripening is regulated by genes encoding cell wall associated
    proteins, ethylene biosynthesis and perception, and synthesis of carotenoids
    and anthocyanin.
86                             E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello



REFERENCES

AOSA (2009) Seed Vigor Testing Handbook. Association of Official Seed Analysts,
     Washington, DC.
Arrizumi, T., Shinozaki, Y. and Ezura, H. (2013) Genes that influence yield in tomato.
     Breeding Science 63, 3–13.
Atherton, J.G. and Rudich, J. (eds) (1986) The Tomato Crop: A Scientific Basis for
     Improvement. Chapman and Hall, London.
Azzi, L., Deluche, C., Gévaudant, F., Frangne, N., Delmas, F., Hernould, M. and Chevalier, C.
     (2015) Fruit growth-related genes in tomato. Journal of Experimental Botany 66,
     1075–1086.
Bemer, M., Karlova, R., Ballester, A.R., Tikunov, Y.M., Bovy, A.G. et al. (2012) The
     t­omato FRUITFULL homologs TDR4/FUL1 and MBP7/FUL2 regulate ethylene-­
      independent aspects of fruit ripening. The Plant Cell 24, 4437–4451.
Bertin, N. (1995) Competition for assimilates and fruit position affect fruit set in inde-
      terminate greenhouse tomato. Annals of Botany 75, 55–65.
Bewley, J.D., Bradford, K.J., Hilhorst, H.W.M. and Nonogaki, H. (2013) Seeds: Physiology
      of Development, Germination and Dormancy (3rd edn). Springer, New York.
Bierhuizen, J.F. and Wagenvoort, W.A. (1974) Some aspects of seed germination in
      vegetables. 1. The determination and application of heat sums and minimum tem-
      perature for germination. Scientia Horticulturae 2, 213–219.
Bours, R. (2014) Antiphase light and temperature cycles disrupt rhythmic plant growth: the
      Arabidopsis jetlag. PhD thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Cao, K., Cui, L.,Ye, L., Zhou, X., Bao, E., Zhao, H. and Zou, Z. (2016) Effects of red light
      night break treatment on growth and flowering of tomato plants. Frontiers in Plant
      Science 7, 527.
Czerednik, A. (2012) Effect of changes in cell cycle gene expression on tomato fruit de-
      velopment. PhD thesis, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Dambreville, A., Lauri, P.E., Normand, F. and Guédon, Y. (2015) Analysing growth and
      development of plants jointly using developmental growth stages. Annals of Botany
      115, 93–105.
De Jong, M., Mariani, C. and Vriezen, W.H. (2009) The role of auxin and gibberellin in
      tomato fruit set. Journal of Experimental Botany 60, 1523–1532.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1994) Development and dry matter distribution in glasshouse to-
      mato: a quantitative approach. PhD thesis, Wageningen Agricultural University,
      Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Demir, I. and Samit, Y. (2001) Quality of tomato seeds as affected by fruit maturity at
      harvest and seed extraction method. Gartenbauwissenschaft 66, 199–202.
Dias, D.C.F.S., Ribeiro, F.P., Dias, L.A.S., Silva, D.J.H. and Vidigal, D.S. (2006) Tomato seed
      quality harvested from different trusses. Seed Science and Technology 34, 681–689.
Dieleman, J.A. and Heuvelink, E. (1992) Factors affecting the number of leaves preced-
      ing the first inflorescence in the tomato. Journal of Horticultural Science 67, 1–10.
Eckstein, A., Jagiełło-Flasinska, D., Lewandowska, A., Hermanowicz, P., Appenroth, K.J. and
      Gabrys, H. (2016) Mobilization of storage materials during light-induced germination of
      tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) seeds. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 105, 271–281.
Fan, X.X., Xu, Z.G., Liu, X.Y., Tang, C.M., Wang, L.W. and Han, X.I. (2013) Effects of
      light intensity on the growth and leaf development of young tomato plants grown
      under a combination of red and blue light. Scientia Horticulturae 153, 50–55.
                                  Developmental Processes                                   87


Gay, A.P. and Hurd, R.G. (1975) The influence of light on stomatal density in the
     ­tomato. New Phytologist 75, 37–46.
Gosselin, A. and Trudel, M.J. (1982) Influence de la temperature du substrat sur la
      croissance, le developpement et le contenu en elements mineraux de plants de
      tomate (cv. Vendor). Canadian Journal of Plant Science 62, 751–757.
Guan, H.P. and Janes, H.W. (1991) Light regulation of sink metabolism in tomato fruit.
      I. Growth and sugar accumulation. Plant Physiology 96, 916–921.
Heuvelink, E. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (1996) Influence of assimilate supply on leaf for-
      mation in sweet pepper and tomato. Journal of Horticultural Science 71, 405–414.
Holder, R. and Cockshull, K.E. (1990) Effects of humidity on the growth and yield of
      glasshouse tomatoes. Journal of Horticultural Science 65, 31–39.
Hurd, R.G. and Cooper, A.J. (1967) Increasing flower number in single-truss tomatoes.
      Journal of Horticultural Science 42, 181–188.
James, E., Bass, L.N. and Clark, D.C. (1964) Longevity of vegetable seeds stored 15 to 30
      years at Cheyenne, Wyoming. American Society of Horticultural Science Proceedings
      84, 527–534.
Karlova, R., Chapman, N., David, K., Angenent, G.C., Seymour, G.B. and de Maagd, R.A.
      (2014) Transcriptional control of fleshy fruit development and ripening. Journal of
      Experimental Botany 65, 4527–4541.
Kucera, B., Cohn, M.A. and Leubner-Metzger, G. (2005) Plant hormone interactions
      during seed dormancy release and germination. Seed Science Research 15, 281–307.
Langton, F.A. and Cockshull, K.E. (1997) Is stem extension determined by DIF or by ab-
      solute day and night temperatures? Scientia Horticulturae 69, 229–237.
Matsuo, S., Kikuchi, K., Fukuda, M., Honda, I., and Imanishi, S. (2012) Roles and regulation of
      cytokinins in tomato fruit development. Journal of Experimental Botany 63, 5569–5579.
Mounet, F., Moing, A., Kowalczyk, M., Rohrmann, J., Petit, J. et al. (2012) Down-
      regulation of a single auxin efflux transport protein in tomato induces precocious
      fruit development. Journal of Experimental Botany 63, 4901–4917.
Nederhoff, E.M., De Koning, A.N.M. and Rijsdijk, A.A. (1992) Leaf deformation and fruit
      production of glasshouse grown tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) as affected
      by CO2, plant density and pruning. Journal of Horticultural Science 67, 411–420.
Nonogaki, H. (2006) Seed germination – the biochemical and molecular mechanisms.
     Breeding Science 56, 93–105.
Okello, R.C.O. (2015) Multi-level analysis of the impact of temperature and light on tomato
     fruit growth. Dissertation, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Okello, R.C.O., Heuvelink, E., de Visser, P.H.B., Lammers, M., de Maagd, R.A., Struik, P.C.
     and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2015) A multi-level analysis of fruit growth of two tomato
     cultivars in response to fruit temperature. Physiologia Plantarum 153, 403–418.
Picken, A.J.F. (1984) A review of pollination and fruit set in the tomato (Lycopersicon
     esculentum Mill.). Journal of Horticultural Science 59, 1–13.
Picken, A.J.F., Hurd, R.G. and Vince-Prue, D. (1985) Lycopersicon esculentum. In: Halevy A.H.
     (ed.) Handbook of Flowering III. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 330–346.
Picken, A.J.F., Stewart, K. and Klapwijk, D. (1986) Germination and vegetative develop-
     ment. In: Atherton, J.G. and Rudich, J. (eds) The Tomato Crop: A Scientific Basis for
     Improvement. Chapman and Hall, London, pp. 111–166.
Prudent, M., Bertin, N., Génard, M., Muños, S., Rolland, S. et al. (2010) Genotype-
     dependent response to carbon availability in growing tomato fruit. Plant, Cell and
     Environment 33, 1186–1204.
88                            E. Heuvelink and R.C.O. Okello


Qian, T., Dieleman, J.A., Elings, A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2012) Leaf photosynthetic and
        morphological responses to elevated CO2 concentration and altered fruit number
     in the semi-closed greenhouse. Scientia Horticulturae 145, 1–9.
Rendon-Poblete, E. (1980) Effect of soil water status on yield, quality and root devel-
     opment of several tomato genotypes. PhD dissertation, University of California,
     Davis, California.
Sachs, R.M. and Hackett, W.P. (1969) Control of vegetative and reproductive develop-
     ment in seed plants. HortScience 4, 103–107.
Samach, A. and Lotan, H. (2007) The transition to flowering in tomato. Plant
     Biotechnology 24, 71–82.
Sato, S., Peet, M.M. and Thomas, J.F. (2000) Physiological factors limit fruit set of to-
     mato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) under chronic, mild heat stress. Plant, Cell &
     Environment 23, 719–726.
Sato, S., Kamiyama, M., Iwata, T., Makita, N., Furukawa, H. and Ikeda, H. (2006)
     Moderate increase of mean daily temperature adversely affects fruit set of
     Lycopersicon esculentum by disrupting specific physiological processes in male
     reproductive development. Annals of Botany 97(5), 731–738. doi: 10.1093/aob/
     mc1037.
Savvides, A., van Ieperen, W., Dieleman, J.A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2013) Meristem tem-
     perature substantially deviates from air temperature even in moderate environ-
     ments: is the magnitude of this deviation species‐specific? Plant, Cell & Environment
     36, 1950–1960.
Savvides, A., Ntagkas, N., van Ieperen, W., Dieleman, J.A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2014)
     Impact of light on leaf initiation: a matter of photosynthate availability in the
     ­apical bud? Functional Plant Biology 41, 547–556.
Schmitz, G. and Theres, K. (1999) Genetic control of branching in Arabidopsis and
      ­tomato. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2, 51–55.
Sinício, R., Lopes, J.F., Silva, D.J.H. and Mattedi, A.P. (2009) Longevity equation for
       ­tomato seeds. Seed Science & Technology 37, 667–675.
Su, L., Bassa, C., Audran, C., Cheniclet, C., Chevalier, C. et al. (2014) The auxin
        Sl-IAA17 transcriptional repressor controls fruit size via the regulation of the
        endoreduplication-­related cell expansion. Plant and Cell Physiology 55, 1969–1976.
Tucker, D.J. (1976) Effects of far-red light on the hormonal control of side shoot growth
        in the tomato. Annals of Botany 40, 1033–1042.
Venkatasubramanian, A. and Umarani, R. (2007) Evaluation of seed priming methods
        to improve seed performance of tomato (Lycoperison esculentum), egg plant (Solanum
        melongena) and chilli (Capsicum annuum). Seed Science & Technology 35, 487–493.
Wang, X., Zhang, L., Xu, X., Qu, W., Li, J., Xu, X. and Wang, A. (2016) Seed devel-
        opment and viviparous germination in one accession of a tomato rin mutant.
        Breeding Science 66, 372–380.
Wagenvoort, W.A. and Bierhuizen, J.F. (1977) Some aspects of seed germination in
        vegetables. II. The effect of temperature fluctuation, depth of sowing, seed size
        and cultivar, on heat sum and minimum temperature for germination. Scientia
        Horticulturae 6, 259–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4238(77)90083-8
Zhu, M., Chen, G., Zhou, S., Tu, Y., Wang, Y., Dong, T. and Hu, Z. (2014) A new tomato
        NAC (NAM ATAF1/2/CUC2) transcription factor, SlNAC4, functions as a positive
        regulator of fruit ripening and carotenoid accumulation. Plant and Cell Physiology
        55, 119–135.
