                                         4
                    Crop Growth and Yield
                     Ep Heuvelink, Tao Li and Martine Dorais




INTRODUCTION

The fresh fruit yield of a tomato crop can be calculated from total crop biomass
production, biomass partitioning (harvest index) and fruit dry matter con-
tent (Fig. 4.1). Besides affecting yield, these attributes also influence product
quality (e.g. fruit size and taste; see Chapter 5).
      Yields of field crops usually range between 40 and 100 t/ha, whereas
yields from year-round cultivation in greenhouses in north-west Europe or
North America easily exceed 500 t/ha, and yields as high as 700–900 t/ha
are obtained in high-tech greenhouses without supplementary light (SL).
With the use of SL, over 1000 t/ha have been produced, according to Verheul
et al. (2012), who estimated that for Norway a yield potential of tomato pro-
duction of 125–140 kg/m2 using artificial light is realistic. The main reasons
for a much higher yield for greenhouse crops compared with field-grown
tomato crops are: (i) the length of the cultivation period (11–12 months;
over 35 trusses harvested per stem) and thus higher cumulative light inter-
ception and biomass production; (ii) the control and optimization of environ-
mental factors (carbon dioxide (CO2), temperature, humidity and light); and
(iii) intensive cultural practices (hydroponics, fertigation, biological and/or
integrated pest and disease control, plant density, additional stems, leaf and
fruit pruning, SL). Annual tomato production per unit greenhouse area in
The Netherlands increased by 113% between 1983 and 2010 (De Gelder
et al., 2012). This increase was due to several factors, including improved cli-
mate control, improved crop and pest management and better control of the
rooting medium. Also, genetic improvement played an important role, as yield
of modern greenhouse tomato cultivars is about 40% higher than that of old
cultivars (Higashide and Heuvelink, 2009). This increase is not related to a
higher harvest index but rather it is due to an increase in light use efficiency
(LUE) following morphological and physiological changes through breeding,
which results in an increase in total dry matter production. For fresh market
field t­omato in North Carolina, genetic gain observed from 1975 to 2009

© CAB International 2018. Tomatoes 2nd edition (E. Heuvelink)                89
90                                         E. Heuvelink et al.



                                     Total yield fresh tomatoes (kg/m2) 89




             Total yield dry tomatoes (kg/m2)               Fruit dry matter content (kg/kg) 106



                      Total crop dry                               Fraction to fruits
                     matter (kg/m2) 93                                    98



 Fraction of light intercepted 93   LUE (g/MJ) 98          Number of fruits     Sink strength of a fruit 105



                                                    Truss appearance          Number of fruits
                                                         rate 71               per truss 75
                        Light extinction
                         coefficient 93

 Leaf area index 93                        Leaf photosynthetic                 Source : sink
                                                 rate 95                         ratio 106



Fig. 4.1. Tomato fruit yield and its underlying components (numbers refer to page
numbers in this book). Tomato fruit fresh yield can be higher, because the total
fruit dry yield is higher and/or because of more dilution with water (lower fruit dry
matter content). (Adapted from Highashide and Heuvelink (2009.)

(~227 kg/ha per year) results mainly from early marketable yield instead of
total yield. Total yield reached its maximum level by 2000 and then levelled
off, but marketable yield is still being improved. Fruit yield of processing to-
mato was genetically improved by 1.54% per year in California over a 20-year
period (Panthee and Gardner, 2011).
     Biomass production is primarily determined by crop photosynthesis, while
photosynthesis to a large extent depends on light interception, which further-
more varies with leaf area. Moreover, a high biomass production does not
necessarily result in a high yield, since only the tomato fruit is of economic
interest. Partitioning to the fruit may be low because of poor fruit set, and con-
sequently low fruit load, or by the low capacity of individual fruits to import
photo-assimilate (fruit sink strength). Finally, fruit dry matter content is of
major importance, since this parameter determines which fresh fruit mass re-
sults from the dry mass partitioned into the fruit. For processing tomato, dry
matter content expressed as soluble solids or sucrose accumulation is of con-
siderable economic importance for the food industry as a major determinant of
palatability and processing characteristics (see Chapter 5).
     Two important interactions (feedback mechanisms) between dry matter
production and dry matter distribution in tomato can be distinguished
(Fig. 4.2): (i) flower and/or fruit abortion at low source–sink ratio, resulting
                                   Crop Growth and Yield                               91




                  –
           Source–sink
             + ratio
                                              Fig. 4.2. A simplified representation
                                              of two important interactions (feedback
                                  Number of   mechanisms) between dry matter
                              +     fruits    production and dry matter partitioning
Pnc                      Wt                   in an ‘indeterminate’ tomato crop:
  +                                           (+) positive influence; (–) negative
                                              influence. Solid lines represent carbon
                                      –
                                              flow; dashed lines represent information
                                  Wveg
                                              flow. LAI, leaf area index; Pnc, crop net
                     +
                                              assimilation rate; SLA, specific leaf area;
               LAI
                              SLA             Wt, total crop dry mass; Wveg, vegetative
                     +                        crop dry mass.

in fewer fruits on the plant and hence decreased sink strength and increased
source–sink ratio; and (ii) partitioning to the vegetative parts determining leaf
area index (LAI) and hence future light interception and dry matter produc-
tion. Fruit yield can be considered as the product of total biomass production
and the fraction partitioned to the fruits (Fig. 4.1). A larger number of fruits
per truss will on the one hand increase partitioning to the fruits. On the other
hand, as at the same time less assimilates are partitioned to the vegetative part,
larger fruit numbers will reduce LAI, the fraction of intercepted light, and
hence total biomass production (Fig. 4.2). Conversely, individual fruit mass in-
creases with decreased fruit number per plant, as competition for assimilates
among fruits is reduced. This increase in individual fruit mass results from a
higher average growth rate of individual fruits, as fruit growth period (time
from anthesis until harvest ripe) is hardly affected by fruit load (see Chapter 3).
At the commercial scale, fruit pruning is generally applied to obtain a certain
desired average fruit weight. Because of these two counteracting effects, fruit
yield shows an optimum response to fruit number per truss, as shown in Fig. 4.3
(Heuvelink and Bakker, 2003).
     Crop growth and yield determining processes mentioned above will be con-
sidered in detail in this chapter, with emphasis on the influence of environmental
factors and crop management such as light, CO2, temperature, humidity, salinity,
plant density, and leaf and fruit pruning. Guidelines on how to grow tomato in
experiments with a controlled environment are provided by Schwarz et al. (2014).


GROWTH OF YOUNG PLANTS

Young plants usually show exponential growth with constant relative growth
rate (RGR), as mutual shading of leaves is limited (Hunt, 1982):
92                                                                 E. Heuvelink et al.


                              5                                       0.8                                                           5                                     12




                                                                                                                                                                               Fruit weight (dry mass, g/fruit)
     Dry mass (kg/m )
                                                                                                                                                                          10
                              4                                                                                                     4
                                                                      0.6




                                                                            Fraction of total to fruits
                                                                                                          Yield (dry mass, kg/m2)
2
                                                                                                                                                                          8
                              3                                                                                                     3


                      2  2
                                                                      0.4                                                                                                 6



and Leaf Area Index (m /m )
                              2                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                      0.2
                              1                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                          2

                              0                                       0.0                                                           0                                      0
                                  1   3   5       7     9     11    13                                                                  1   3   5      7      9     11   13
                                      Number of fruits per truss                                                                            Number of fruits per truss

Fig. 4.3. Simulated (TOMSIM) effects of the number of fruits per truss for a round
tomato cultivar on leaf area index (¯), the fraction dry mass distributed to the fruits
(£) and on fruit dry mass production: total fruit including unripe fruits (®), harvested
ripe fruit (), total biomass (—) and average dry weight per fruit harvested ().



                       Wt 2 = Wt1 × e RGR(t 2–t1)

where Wt1 and Wt2 represent plant dry mass at times t1 and t2, respectively.
RGR can be separated in a ‘photosynthetic term’, net assimilation rate (NAR),
and a ‘morphogenetic term’, leaf area ratio (LAR) (Hunt, 1982):

                        RGR = NAR × LAR

                        NAR = 1/At × dWt /dt

                       LAR = At /Wt

where At is plant leaf area at time t.
     An evaluation of experimental design and computational methods in
plant growth analysis is given by Poorter and Garnier (1996). LAR may be fur-
ther separated into the leaf weight ratio (LWR), i.e. the ratio of leaf dry weight
over total plant dry weight, and the specific leaf area (SLA), i.e. the ratio of leaf
area over leaf dry weight. Variations in LAR are usually primarily caused by
variations in SLA (Hunt, 1982).
     Growth analysis has proved highly effective in studying a plant’s reac-
tion to environmental conditions. However, it has its limitation, especially
when analysing crop growth, where mutual shading of leaves begins within
a few weeks of emergence and is the major reason for a rapid decline of both
RGR and NAR. Therefore, attempts to correlate these quantities with changes
in the environment during the growing season have rarely been successful.
Furthermore, NAR and LAR are often mutually dependent, showing a negative
correlation, which hampers breeding for cultivars with a higher RGR. Finally,
                              Crop Growth and Yield                            93


a comparison based on time-averaged growth parameters may be misleading
and averaging over a dry weight interval is preferred, as growth rate is size
­dependent (ontogenetic effect).


BIOMASS PRODUCTION

Cumulative biomass production of a tomato crop basically follows a sigmoid
pattern in time. A short exponential growth phase with a constant relative
growth rate gradually evolves to a long phase of linear growth, with a more or
less constant absolute growth rate. At ripe fruit stage, growth rate will decrease
for ‘determinate’ tomato types, as a result of leaf senescence and reduction
in sink strength negatively influencing photosynthesis. For ‘indeterminate’
tomato types the linear growth phase continues until the end of the cultiva-
tion, resulting in an expo-linear growth pattern. However, this type of growth
pattern may not be observed, since towards the end of the cultivation plants
are generally decapitated, giving the same response as ‘determinate’ types.
Moreover, low light levels observed in late autumn (October and November)
and changes in crop light interception as influenced by leaf area development
may also reduce growth rate.


Leaf area and light interception

The amount of absorbed (intercepted) light by the canopy is a determining
factor in tomato crop growth and biomass production and depends mainly
on leaf area, the canopy structure and the distribution of the leaf area over
ground area. The relationship between the fraction of light intercepted and
LAI (m2 leaf area per m2 ground area) follows the Lambert-Beer law (1 – e–k.LAI).
The constant in this relationship is called the extinction coefficient k and for
tomato its value is about 0.7 for diffuse radiation. Hence, at LAI of 3, 90% of
the incident light is intercepted. Modern greenhouse tomato cultivars have a
lower k as a result of a changed morphology (e.g. leaf angles): for example,
k decreased from 0.85 (in 1950) to 0.57 (in 2002), contributing to a higher
light use efficiency resulting from a less heterogeneous vertical light distribu-
tion (Higashide and Heuvelink, 2009). For a processing tomato crop, at LAI
of 4.5, k is around 0.45 (Cavero et al., 1998), while for semi-indeterminate
field-grown tomato k ranges from 1 early in the season to around 0.2 late in
the season (Scholberg et al., 2000). Estimated light interception for LAI of 4–5
is in that case about 50–60% during the period of maximum seasonal fruit
development. These values are substantially lower than for greenhouse crops,
because of wide row spacing, leading to a percentage ground area covered that
could be as low as 55% (see below). In particular, internode length and leaf
shape affect the vertical distribution of light in the canopy. A more spacious
94                               E. Heuvelink et al.


canopy architecture due to long internodes and long and narrow leaves led to
an increase in simulated crop photosynthesis of up to 10% (Sarlikioti, 2011).
To optimize the light interception by the canopy according to the incident solar
radiation, a crop starts with a rather low plant density (e.g. 2.5 plants/m2) to
avoid any negative effect on fruit size or yield under low light (winter), and
then in spring a side shoot is retained on every second plant (see Chapter 9). In
this way, stem density is increased (e.g. 3.75 stems/m2) towards the summer
and a higher LAI can be maintained, resulting in a significant yield increase
without additional planting cost. It was also reported that the fraction of light
intercepted for a north–south orientation of rows was 10% (winter) up to 23%
(summer) higher compared with an east–west orientation (Sarlikioti, 2011).
LAI is also modulated by greenhouse tomato growers, since leaves are removed
up to just above the truss to be harvested (see Chapter 9) or pruned according
to the targeted leaf-to-fruit ratio.
      For semi-determinate field-grown tomato, after an initial lag phase of
225oCd (225 degree-days), LAI increased linearly with degree-days after plant-
ing (base temperature of 10°C), resulting in an average maximum value of
3.8 attained 11 weeks after planting (Fig. 4.4A) (Scholberg et al., 2000). Near-
optimal light interception within the row for field-grown tomato appears to
be attained within 4–6 weeks at intra-row spacing of 45 and 60 cm, respect-
ively (Scholberg et al., 2000). Canopy closure between rows, however, does not
occur practically and pesticide applications and harvesting operations may
become difficult with row spacing under 1.8 m. Thus, based on a maximum
observed canopy width of 1.0 m, the percentage ground area covered by the
crop would be around 83%, 67% and 55% for row spacings of 1.2, 1.5 and
1.8 m, respectively (Scholberg et al., 2000). For an optimum light interception
and fruit yield of field-grown tomato crop, the LAI should be around 4–5 with
a plant population of 10,000–60,000 plants/ha, according to the cultivars,
soil fertility, growing and irrigation systems (raised bed, mulch, drip irrigation,
sub-irrigation), and available solar radiation. Lower LAI values would reduce
light interception and increase yield losses due to sunburn, while higher values
may delay the onset of fruit production and reduce the effectiveness of foliar
pesticides.
      For greenhouse and field tomato, the amount and quality of light inter-
cepted by a crop can be enhanced or modified by the presence of reflecting
material on the ground, such as white plastic sheets and mulches. Bare soil
reflects 10–20% of the photosynthetic active radiation (PAR) (400–700 nm),
whereas white plastic sheets on the soil surface, a common practice in green-
houses, may reflect 50–80% of the PAR and increase crop photosynthesis over
the whole season by at least 7% for LAI at 3 (Gijzen, 1995). This is especially
important for the young crop, where a lot of light is transmitted by the crop
and reaches the ground. For determinate type of fresh tomato, young plants
grown with white mulch had ~3 times more axillary leaves than plants in black
mulch, contributing to a 3.6 times greater ratio of axillary to main leaf area
                                                             Crop Growth and Yield                                                                           95


 (A)                       6                                              (B) 1500
                                                                                                                       Biom (Sub-I)
                                                                                                                       Biom (Drip-I)
                           5                                                                             1200          Fruit (Sub-I)




Leaf area index (LAI)
                                                                                                                       Fruit (Drip-I)




                                                                          Dry weight (g/m2)
                           4
                                                                                                          900
                           3
                                                                                                          600
                           2
                                                            Sub - I                                       300
                           1                                Drip - I
                                                            Lin. Plat.
                           0                                                                                0
                               0    300      600      900   1200   1500                                         0           300   600   900     1200       1500
                                   Degree days after planting (°Cd)                                                  Degree days after planting (°Cd)

 (C)                                                                         (D)
    1500                                                                                                  1.0
                                   Biom (Sub-I)                                                                     Root
                                   Biom (Drip-I)                                                                    Stem




                                                                          Fraction of total dry weight
                        1200       Fruit (Sub-I)                                                         0.8        Leaf
                                   Fruit (Drip-I)                                                                   Fruit




     Dry weight (g/m2)
                         900                                                                             0.6


                         600                                                                             0.4


                         300                                                                             0.2


                           0                                                                             0.0
                               0       300          600     900       1200                                      0        300      600   900    1200       1500
                           Calculated cum. intercepted radiation (MJ m–2)                                              Degree days after planting (°Cd)

Fig. 4.4. (A) Leaf area index (r2=0.74); (B) total dry weight (Biom) (r2=0.91) and
fruit dry weight (r2=0.79) accumulation of field tomato grown in Florida (USA) as
a function of thermal time; (C) estimated cumulative intercepted radiation (r2=0.92
and r2=0.84, respectively) with subirrigation (Sub-I) and drip irrigation (Drip-I);
and (D) fraction of total dry weight accumulated in root (r2=0.92), stem (r2=0.50),
leaf (r2=0.93) and fruit (r2=0.81). (Reprinted, with permission, from Scholberg et al.
(2000), Agronomy Journal 92, 152–159.)


compared with plants grown with black mulch. However, leaf area for total
leaves (main + axillary) and plant biomass was unaffected by mulch surface
colour. This mulch effect is not maintained throughout plant development, due
to the increased shading of the mulch by the canopy (Decoteau, 2007).


Photosynthesis

The leaf photosynthetic rate depends strongly on the amount of photo-
synthetic protein per leaf area, CO2 conductance through the stomata and
96                                              E. Heuvelink et al.


­mesophyll conductance. While the light-harvesting and electron transport
 systems convert the free energy of absorbed light into useful metabolic forms
 (e.g. adenosine triphosphate (ATP), reduced ferredoxin (Fd), nicotinamide
 ­adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)), CO2 assimilation is a key process
   in crop production. PAR supplies the energy for photosynthesis. The RuBisCO
   enzyme (ribulose-1,5-bis-phosphate-carboxylase-oxygenase) catalyses the
  ­incorporation of CO2 (carboxylation), but RuBisCO also has affinity to O2 (oxy-
  genation), resulting in release of CO2 (photorespiration). RuBisCO contains
  as much as 25–40% of the total leaf nitrogen (N) and so it is understandable
  that leaf nitrogen and leaf photosynthetic capacity are strongly correlated.
  N deficiency decreased maximal rate of gross photosynthesis (Pg,max) and the
  chlorophyll fluorescence parameter Fv/Fm, which is a quantitative measure of
  photochemical efficiency of photosystem II (PSII). The relationship between
  nitrogen status of the tomato plant and photosynthesis is covered in Chapter 6.
        Photosynthetic capacity of leaves varies widely according to light, water
  and nutrient availability and these differences in capacity usually reflect
  RuBisCO content. Leaves in high light environments (‘sun’ leaves) have greater
  CO2 assimilation capacities than those in shaded environments or lower in a
canopy (Fig. 4.5) (Trouwborst et al., 2011) and this is reflected in the larger
allocation of nitrogen-based resources to photosynthetic carbon reduction.
Sun leaves have a high stomatal density, are thicker and have a higher ratio of
RuBisCO to chlorophyll in order to utilize the larger availability of photons (and


 (A)                                                              (B)
                    40                                            40




 Amax (μmol/m2/s)
                    30                                            30


                    20                                            20


                    10                                            10


                    0                                              0
                         0   1     2      3      4            5         0     400     500    600    700
                             Overlaying LAI (m/m2)                             PPFD-integral during
                                                                            leaf development (mol/m2)

                                       7 June        6 July       25 July     6 September

Fig. 4.5. (A) The effect of overlaying leaf area index (LAI) on the Amax of leaves in
vertically grown tomato plants measured on four dates in summer and (B) the effect
of the PPFD-integral received during 21 days of leaf development on the Amax of the
youngest mature leaves. Reprinted from Trouwborst et al., 2011, by permission of
Taylor and Francis Ltd (http://www.tandfonline.com).
                                 Crop Growth and Yield                                97


 hence ATP and NADPH). Shade leaves are larger and thinner, but have more
 chlorophyll per unit leaf dry weight than sun leaves. Shade leaves achieve a
 lower maximum rate of assimilation.
        To uncouple leaf age from photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD),
 ­tomato plants were grown horizontally, hence PPFD was similar for all leaves.
  Photosynthetic capacity and chlorophyll contents were higher in late spring
  than in winter but were hardly affected by leaf age (Trouwborst et al., 2011).
  Shading fully developed mature leaves dramatically decreased their Pg,max and
  chlorophyll contents within a few days. Therefore, during the normal 70-day
  lifespan of tomato leaves in commercial cultivation, the decrease in PPFD
  within the canopy, and not leaf-ageing, is the most important factor causing
  reduction in Pg,max with canopy depth. The lower Pg,max of older leaves is attrib-
  uted to a reduced content of RuBisCO rather than a lower RuBisCO activity.
        In a tomato canopy of LAI 8.6, the uppermost 23% of the total leaf area
  assimilated 66% of the net CO2 fixed by the canopy (Acock et al., 1978). In
contrast to individual leaves, the light saturation for canopy photosynthesis
does not occur for a tomato crop, as part of the canopy does not reach light
saturation. In conditions where the rate of photosynthetic CO2 assimilation
exceeds the capacity of sink organs (e.g. high light and CO2 concentration),
  there is an accumulation of carbohydrates in the leaves which might trigger
  a down-regulation of photosynthesis involving a repression of several photo-
  synthetic genes encoding for RuBisCO and thylakoid proteins.
        Truss peduncle, pedicels, calyxes and green fruit may contribute to a certain
  extent to photosynthesis. An early study reported that fruit contributes by its own
  fixed carbon 10–15% of the carbon skeletons required (Tanaka et al., 1974). At
  light saturation, the photosynthetic rate in young truss peduncles reached 5 mg
  CO2/h/g dry weight (DW) compared with 3.5 mg CO2/h/g in older ones, while
  the gross photosynthetic rate per green fruit surface area was 15–30% of that in
  the leaves (Czarnowski and Starzecki, 1990). For small fruit (10 g fresh weight
  (FW)), Pg,max reached 0.43 μmol CO2 /kg/s, which was similar to a 3 cm2 leaf (Xu
  et al., 1997). As the fruit size increased, Pg,max ­decreased to a negligible value and
no net photosynthesis was found in a fruit over 40 g FW because of high dark
respiration. Except for young fruit, respiration always exceeds gross photosyn-
thesis in tomato fruit, even under high light. The accumulation of dry matter in
a tomato fruit is thus dependent on the import of leaf assimilate. Although fruit
photosynthesis is not necessary for fruit energy metabolism or development, it
is essential for properly timed seed development and therefore may confer an
­advantage under conditions of stress (Lytovchenko et al., 2011).
        Whereas steady-state photosynthetic responses to environmental factors
 have been extensively studied, knowledge of dynamic modulation of photo-
 synthesis remains scarce and scattered. However, incident irradiance on
 plant leaves often fluctuates, causing dynamic photosynthesis. SL provided by
 light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can be switched on and off rapidly; hence, growers
 using LEDs could use fluctuations in energy prices to determine when to switch
98                                E. Heuvelink et al.


their lighting on and off, resulting in a more dynamic irradiance. Dynamic
photosynthesis is separated into sub-processes related to proton and electron
transport, non-photochemical quenching, control of metabolite flux through
the Calvin cycle (activation states of RuBisCO and RuBP regeneration, and
post-illumination metabolite turnover) and control of CO2 supply to RuBisCO
(stomatal and mesophyll conductance changes) (Kaiser, 2016). Increases in
ambient CO2 concentration and temperature (up to about 35°C) enhance rates
of photosynthetic induction and decrease its loss, facilitating more efficient
dynamic photosynthesis. Depending on the sensitivity of stomatal conduct-
ance, dynamic photosynthesis may additionally be modulated by air humidity.
However, RuBisCO activase and stomatal conductance are main targets for im-
provement of photosynthesis in fluctuating irradiance.


Light use efficiency

Quantum yield or LUE, expressed as mol CO2 fixed per mol photons absorbed,
can be defined at leaf level but also at crop canopy level. Its value depends on
light intensity, atmospheric CO2 concentration and humidity, the composition
of solar radiation (higher LUE at diffuse radiation; see ‘Diffuse light’ pp. 111–112)
and root environment (soil moisture, salinity). At ambient CO2 concentration,
leaf LUE is about 0.05 mol/mol, with a maximum of 0.08 mol/mol without
photorespiration, i.e. at very high CO2 levels. A combination of CO2 enrich-
ment and SL for greenhouse crops grown in winter in northern regions could
have a synergistic effect in increasing LUE at crop level. A high temperature,
however, increases (photo)respiration and consequently decreases LUE. At am-
bient CO2 concentration, LUE decreases by about 15% when temperature rises
from 15°C to 30°C. In greenhouse-grown tomato plants, LUE may be higher
than in field-grown plants because of the ultraviolet (UV)-protective epidermis
of field plants. Higher LUE of modern greenhouse cultivars (3.3 to 3.5 g/MJ
PAR compared with 2.4–2.5 g/MJ PAR) results from a decrease in the light
extinction coefficient and an increase in leaf photosynthetic rate (Higashide
and Heuvelink, 2009). For the humid tropics of Central Thailand, in ventilated
greenhouses with polyethylene (PE)-film roofs and PE-net walls, LUE of 2.6 g/MJ
was reported, which is similar to regions at greater latitude with much lower
global radiation (Kleinhenz et al., 2006). For field-grown fresh tomato, LUE of
2.1 g/MJ (PAR) was observed (Scholberg et al., 2000) (Fig. 4.4C), while 2.4 g/MJ
is generally used for processing tomato (Cavero et al., 1998).


BIOMASS PARTITIONING

The total dry matter production and partitioning within a tomato plant differs
considerably between tomato genotypes and depends on the developmental
                                Crop Growth and Yield                             99


stage. In young tomato plants, 8% (high N supply) to 24% (low N supply) of
total dry matter was distributed to the roots (Nagel et al., 2001), while 4% was
allocated to the roots in producing tomato plants under ample nutrient supply
(Khan and Sagar, 1969). For a long-season crop, the total yield is determined
by the balance between the vegetative and reproductive growth and conse-
quently the assimilate partitioning. In a tomato plant, assimilate availability
(source strength) is usually lower than assimilate demand (sink strength),
which is shown by increased fruit size when some of the fruits are removed at
an early stage. Increased light intensity and CO2 concentration improve source
strength, whereas sink strength primarily depends on temperature. Hence,
competition occurs between vegetative and generative plant organs, among
trusses and among fruits within a truss.
     Only biomass allocated to the fruits contributes to yield (Fig. 4.1); there-
fore, biomass allocation has a direct impact on tomato crop production. For
a year-round greenhouse crop, 72% of total dry mass was allocated to the
fruits (Table 4.1) (De Koning, 1993), while a harvest index (HI) of 69% (plant
without side shoots) was reported (Cockshull et al., 1992) compared with
53–71%, with an average of 58%, for field-grown semi-determinate tomato
(Scholberg et al., 2000) (Fig. 4.4D) and 57–67% for processing tomato (Cavero
et al., 1998; Hewitt and Marrush, 1986). High-yielding crops typically have
HI values of about 65%. Higher and lower values may be observed according
to the number of trusses harvested, the crop management and the season (e.g.
winter versus spring/summer/autumn). In an indeterminate plant, the fresh
weight gain by fruit accounts for almost 85% of the plant gain, because fruits
accumulate more water than other organs (Table 4.1). A certain balance be-
tween vegetative (future production potential) and generative growth (short-
term productivity) should be maintained, as sufficient but not too much new
leaf area has to grow for future light interception and biomass production.
Besides its influence on total fruit mass, partitioning also influences individual
fruit mass in tomato (Fig. 4.3).
     Although the mechanism by which a plant partitions its resources be-
tween the different organs is of both theoretical and practical interest, it is still
not fully understood. It is generally agreed that sinks play an important role

              Table 4.1. Total performance of an early tomato crop
              (De Koning, 1993).

                              Fresh weight                Dry weight

                            kg/m2         %             kg/m2      %

              Fruits        51.7         84.2           2.96      71.5
              Leaves         6.6         10.7           0.76      18.2
              Stem           3.1          5.1           0.43      10.3
              Total         61.4                        4.15
100                              E. Heuvelink et al.


in partitioning, and in a tomato plant the fruits are the most important sinks.
Biomass allocation in tomato is both dynamic and complex. It involves the
transport of assimilates from sources to sinks. Hence sources, the transport
path and sinks may influence allocation. Evidence for this comes from a range
of studies. Changes in the leaf-to-fruit ratio, modification of leaf photosyn-
thetic activity by shading, or altering of the activity of some leaf metabolic
enzymes have all had repercussions in fruit yield and/or sugar accumulation
(Luengwilai et al., 2010).
      Hormonal signals, such as cytokinins, abscisic acid, the ethylene pre-
cursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid and the auxin indole-3-
acetic acid may coordinate assimilate production and biomass partitioning
(Pérez-Alfocea et al., 2010). Hormonal regulation of source–sink relations
during the osmotic phase of salinity, which is independent of the ionic
­effect, affects whole-plant energy availability to prolong the maintenance
 of growth, root function and ion homeostasis and could be critical to delay
 the accumulation of sodium (Na+) or any other ion to toxic levels (Pérez-
 Alfocea et al., 2010). Initial growth maintenance requires regulation of sto-
 matal conductance and source–sink relations to avoid premature stomatal
 and metabolic inhibitions of photosynthesis, and subsequent oxidative
 damage and senescence.


Shoot/root ratio

Despite the fact that it has been challenged, the functional equilibrium is a con-
cept that helps in understanding the partitioning of assimilates between shoot
and root. According to this paradigm, partitioning between shoot and root is
regulated by an equilibrium between root activity (water or nutrient absorp-
tion) and shoot activity (photosynthesis):
      Ws /Wr ∞ Sr /S s
where Wr is root mass, Ws is shoot mass, Ss is specific photosynthesis rate of
the shoot and Sr is specific absorption rate of the root. Observations of environ-
mental effects on shoot/root ratio in tomato are well explained by this theory.
For example, shoot/root ratio is lower for plants grown in higher irradiance,
which increases specific shoot activity. Similarly, shoot/root ratio is higher for
plants grown at higher root temperature or improved nutrition, which im-
proves specific root activity. Increasing the temperature of the root zone from
14°C to 26°C increased the quantity of water absorbed during a day by 30%,
the rate of absorption of nitrogen (N), potassium (K) and magnesium (Mg) by
21–24% and the rate of absorption of calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P) by
45% and 64%, respectively (Dorais et al., 2001a).
     The functional equilibrium paradigm is useful in understanding partitioning
in young, vegetative tomato plants. However, it is not easily applied to fruiting
plants. The shoot/root ratio increases as plants grow and in the early fruiting
                              Crop Growth and Yield                           101


phase root growth often ceases completely. It later resumes and thereafter the
ratio of vegetative shoot-to-root fresh weight remains essentially constant (4:1).


Source strength

The source strength (availability of assimilates) has no direct influence on as-
similate partitioning, as different assimilate availability affects growth rate of
all organs to the same relative extent. For example, despite a large reduction in
assimilate availability at high plant density (plants grown at 1.6, 2.1 and 3.1
plants/m2 reached a total dry mass of 596, 478, 340 g/plant, respectively),
biomass allocation was not influenced (Heuvelink, 1995b). Indirect effects,
through the number of sinks (sink strength), were in this experiment excluded
by fruit pruning. However, at very low assimilate availability, priority of the
apex over an initiating inflorescence has been found. Under such conditions
the inflorescence, or part of its flowers, may abort, while the growth of young
leaves continues.


Transport path

Supply of assimilates from leaves to trusses in a multi-truss tomato plant is
rather localized, the three subtended leaves of a truss being the principal sup-
pliers. A truss together with the three leaves immediately below it has been re-
garded as a sink–source unit, though this relationship is not absolute. As fruits
attract assimilate rather locally, the supply of assimilate to the apex and the
roots may be mainly confined to a few upper leaves and the bottom leaves, re-
spectively (Ho, 1996). Within each truss, the fruits on one side tend to receive
more assimilate from leaves on the same side of the stem, even if this distribu-
tion is not absolute. Removing a truss at anthesis results in yield increases on
some of the remaining trusses closest to the one removed (Fig. 4.6). These ob-
servations seem to suggest that the transport path (phloem resistance) plays
an important role in biomass allocation in tomato plants. However, a study in
double-shoot tomato plants where on half of the plants no trusses were re-
moved from one shoot and all trusses were removed at anthesis from the other
shoot (100–0), whereas on the other plants every other truss was removed
from both shoots (50–50), showed that biomass allocation was the same
for both treatments (Fig. 4.7). No significant influence of distance between
source and sink on partitioning was found. Hence, biomass allocation may be
considered to originate from one common assimilate pool. This does not ex-
clude the possibility that in intact plants trusses are fed predominantly by the
leaves nearby and it also does not conflict with previous observations, which
can be easily explained without assuming a ‘distance effect’ on assimilate
partitioning. Trusses closest to the one excised get the highest yield increase.
Earlier-initiated trusses have a shorter growth period left to take profit from
removing a truss and later-initiated trusses miss a larger part of the period
102                                                  E. Heuvelink et al.


                                 1.16




                                 1.12




         Relative truss weight
                                 1.08




                                 1.04




                                 1.00
                                     –5   –4   –3   –2   –1      0    1      2   3   4   5   6
                                                              Truss position

Fig. 4.6. Relative truss weight over controls for trusses above (positive numbers)
and below (negative numbers) an excised truss (0) on tomato plants. No influence
of position on the plant on sink strength of a truss or vegetative unit was assumed.
Vertical bars indicate standard error of mean. Measurements (—) reprinted, with
permission, from Slack and Calvert, 1977, Journal of Horticultural Science 52, 312,
and simulation lines (TOMSIM).


where removal of the truss plays a role. During one fruit growth period (about
60 days at 20°C) after expected anthesis date of the excised truss, its removal
no longer plays a role. Furthermore, trusses closest to the excised truss exhibit
highest sink strength in the period where excision has the largest influence
on total sink strength, i.e. the period where the highest sink strength of the
excised truss would have occurred. In conclusion, transport path plays only a
minor role in biomass allocation in tomato.


Sink strength

Partitioning may be analysed according to the concept of sink strengths. The
term sink strength is used to describe the competitive ability of an organ to
                                                Crop Growth and Yield                      103



                                          (A)




                                                   50–50                 100–0
                  (B)


                                   750
                                                                           plant



                  Dry weight (g)
                                   500


                                   250
                                                                                   fruit
                                     0
                                     60                100                 140
                                                           Day of year

Fig. 4.7. (A) Schematic presentation of two pruning treatments on tomato plants
with two equal stems: removal of every second truss at anthesis on each of the two
stems (50–50) or removal of all trusses at anthesis from one stem and no truss removal
from the other stem (100–0). (B) Total (closed symbols) and fruit (open symbols) dry
weight increase for pruning treatment 50–50 (squares) and 100–0 (triangle).

attract assimilates. Sink strength can be quantified by the potential growth
rate of a sink, i.e. the growth rate under conditions of non-limiting assimilate
supply, and depends on sink activity and size. Whereas sink activity is deter-
mined by processes such as phloem transport, metabolism and compartmenta-
tion, sink size is determined by the cell number (Ho, 1996).
     Since sink strength determines dry matter distribution, the fraction of
dry matter partitioned to the fruits (Ffruits) may be calculated as generative sink
strength (SSgen) divided by total plant sink strength, the latter being the sum of
generative and vegetative sink strength (SSveg):
                            SS gen
     Ffruits =
                 SS gen + SSveg

    Generative sink strength is the integral of sink strength of all trusses
growing on the plant. Sink strength of a truss is proportional to the number of
104                                E. Heuvelink et al.


fruits per truss. However, at high fruit numbers per truss, this is no longer so, as
the distal fruits show a reduced sink strength (De Koning, 1994). Nevertheless,
cell size measured on proximal fruits was not significantly affected by fruit load
treatments in one of two studied genotypes (Prudent et al., 2010).
      The order of priority in assimilate partitioning changes from the order of
root > young leaf > flower in flowering plant to that of fruit > young leaf >
flower and root in fruiting plants (Ho, 1996). The low sink strength of flowers
might be due to low cell division activity, as enhanced cell division activity in
the ovary caused by hormonal treatment (cytokinin and gibberellic acid) may
generate an improved sink strength. The role of cell division and cell enlarge-
ment in fruit sink strength and fruit growth is further discussed in Chapter 3.
      Sink strength of a fruit is primarily determined by fruit developmental
stage. The fraction partitioned into the fruits shows a saturation-type response
with time (Fig. 4.4D): in the early stages only a small proportion is partitioned
into the fruits, as only a few small fruits are competing with vegetative growth.
Once fruit harvest has commenced, a steady-state constant partitioning is
reached, assuming equal numbers of fruit for each truss. Fruits are competing
with vegetative parts as a whole, as partitioning within the vegetative parts is
fairly constant.

Leaf sink strength
The effect of the second leaf removal of each vegetative unit between two
successive trusses when it was only 1–3 cm long was simulated by Xiao et al.
(2004) (Table 4.2). As expected, the reduced vegetative sink strength by leaf
pruning increased partitioning to the fruits from 66% to 74%. However, yield
was hardly affected, as leaf pruning resulted in a lower LAI and therefore
lower light interception and total biomass production. In contrast, when leaf

Table 4.2. Average LAI, total and fruit dry weight, and fraction partitioned to
the fruit in a simulation study for a greenhouse tomato crop (January–September).
Dry matter partitioning is simulated based on sink strengths of plant organs. Leaf
pruning (removal of one out of each three young leaves) was simulated by reducing
the sink strength of each vegetative unit by 1/3. Lowest, old leaves from a vegetative
section were removed 1 week before fruits on the corresponding truss above the
section were harvest-ripe. Seven fruits per truss were assumed. When delayed leaf
removal was applied, removal of old leaves was delayed by 2 weeks compared with
the control (Xiao et al., 2004).

                             LAI   Total dry weight Fruit dry weight Fruit fraction
Treatments                 (m2/m2)      (g/m2)            (g/m2)          (%)

Control                      2.4           3190             2093              66
Leaf pruning                 1.7           2887             2125              74
Leaf pruning and delayed     2.3           3201             2362              74
  old leaf removal
                                Crop Growth and Yield                             105


pruning was combined with delayed picking of older leaves to obtain the same
LAI as in the control, a yield increase of 13% was predicted. Hence, a tomato
cultivar with two instead of three leaves between trusses would improve yield,
when combined with measures to keep LAI sufficiently high (Heuvelink et al.,
2005). On the other hand, it was observed that leaf-to-fruit ratio (LFR) higher
than 1 had a negligible effect on fruit growth but could increase fruit solid
content as well as the sucrose concentration of the phloem sap. Specifically,
when LFR increased from 0.2 to 1, fruit dry weight increased linearly, but
it saturated beyond 1. In contrast, the contents of dry matter and soluble
sugars on a fresh weight basis increased linearly from LFR of 0.2 to 3 (Jan and
Kawabata, 2011).

Fruit sink strength
In developing tomato fruit, sucrose metabolizing enzymes may regulate
­sucrose unloading and sink strength and thus fruit dry matter accumulation.
 Acid invertase may not play an important role in the regulation of assimilate
 import by the tomato fruit (Dorais et al., 1999). However, over-expression of
 sucrose-phosphate synthase (SPS) in field tomato fruit increased sucrose syn-
 thase (Susy) activity by 27%, and 70% more sucrose was unloaded in trans-
 formant fruit (20 days after anthesis) compared with the untransformed
 control. Acid invertase and ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (ADP-Glc PPase,
 or AGPase) activities remained at similar levels or were slightly lower than in
 the untransformed control. Unexpectedly, the repression of Susy activity in
 the fruit (antisense cDNA of the tomato fruit specific Susy, TOMSSF) did not
 ­affect the unloading capacity when compared with the untransformed plants.
  Hence, four sucrose turnover cycles (I, sucrose degradation and resynthesis
  in the cytosol; II, sucrose degradation in the vacuole and resynthesis in the
  cytosol; III, sucrose degradation in the apoplast and resynthesis in the cytosol;
  and IV, starch degradation and synthesis in the amyloplast) may control sink
  activity of tomato fruit (Dorais et al., 1999). Thus, sink utilization (i.e. respir-
  ation, cellular structure, growth and storage) determines the sucrose import
  rate. Sucrose metabolizing enzymes may affect the unloading rate but they are
  not the main regulatory factors.
       Substrate cycles of sucrose and starch may provide metabolic flexibility
  and help to maintain the fruit as a carbon sink (Luengwilai and Beckles,
  2009). Studies using transgenic lines whereby AGPase was over-expressed
  and suppressed provided evidence that starch plays a more direct role in
  ­determining total soluble sugars and yield (Beckles et al., 2012). Indeed, parti-
   tioning of carbon to starch may increase sink strength in green fruit and then,
   when it is degraded during ripening, adds to the pool of sugars imported from
   the phloem. Approaches to manipulate fruit sink strength in order to improve
   harvest index and thereby crop yield and quality have been discussed earlier
   (Herbers and Sonnewald, 1998), while biochemical factors contributing to
   ­tomato fruit sugar content have been reviewed by Beckles et al. (2012).
 106                                                        E. Heuvelink et al.


 Source–sink ratio

  For several cultivars, the altered source–sink ratio by leaf or fruit pruning
  did not influence the light-saturated photosynthesis of young, fully ex-
  panded leaves measured under CO2-limited conditions (Matsuda et al., 2011).
  Although soluble sugars accumulated in leaves under high source–sink con-
  ditions, the amount of RuBisCO was not affected by the altered source–sink
  balance. This study supports previous works suggesting that a decreased sink
  capacity did not lower leaf photosynthetic rate under CO2-limited conditions
  (Heuvelink and Buiskool, 1995). However, photosynthetic acclimation did
  occur under elevated CO2, when plant sink strength was reduced by about
 70% (Qian et al., 2012).
       It was estimated that total assimilate demand is twice the assimilate
 ­availability, averaged over a whole growing season (De Koning, 1994), while
  a calculated source–sink strength ratio of 0.3 was reported by Bertin (1995).
  This difference may have a genetic background, as these authors did not use
  the same cultivar. For greenhouse crops, the pattern of source–sink ratio over
  time for three types of tomato (cherry, round and beefsteak type) was initially
  above 1 (Li et al., 2015). This occurs because in the young crop there are only a
  few sink organs – young leaves and perhaps one truss with small fruit, whereas
  the crop already intercepts a lot of the light (a relatively high leaf area). In this
  period supplementary light is not useful, as the plant is sink limited. During
  most of the growing season, however, the source–sink ratio is lower than 1
  (Fig. 4.8), so higher PPFD will stimulate growth and yield.


 FRUIT DRY MATTER CONTENT

 Fruit dry matter content (dry matter as percentage of fruit fresh weight) de-
 creases during fruit development (see Chapter 3) and is larger in summer than
 spring or autumn. Generally, 4–7.5% of tomato content is dry matter; this is

                    1.6
                    1.4




Source–sink ratio
                    1.2
                    1.0                                                           Fig. 4.8. Calculated source–
                                                  Medium fruit size               sink ratio over time for three
                    0.8
                                                            Small fruit size      tomato cultivars with standard
                    0.6
                                                                                  fruit load. Lines are moving
                    0.4
                              Large fruit size                                    averages over 5 days. Dashed
                    0.2                                                           horizontal line represents a
                    0.0                                                           source–sink ratio of 1. Fruit
                          0        20       40        60          80       100
                                         Days after planting                      set started between 20–30
                                                                                  days after planting for all three
                                 Komeett         Capricia     Sunstream           cultivars (Li et al., 2015).
                                Crop Growth and Yield                            107


dependent on genotype (e.g. higher for cherry tomatoes than beefsteak toma-
toes) and could reach 17% for wild tomato species (Dorais et al., 2001a). Dry
matter content correlates positively with a better taste, as normally sugars rep-
resent about 50% of the dry matter in fruits, and a higher sugar concentra-
tion correlates with a better taste (see Chapter 5). For some Japanese tomato
cultivars, a strong positive correlation between fruit dry matter content and
the soluble solids content in fruits has been observed (Higashide et al., 2012).
Dry matter content of harvest ripe fruit is slightly higher for fruits grown at
non-limiting assimilate supply, probably due to extra storage of carbohydrates.
It also increases with temperature (De Koning, 1994). A higher solids content
of tomato fruit for processing is an important breeding goal. Unfortunately, there
is often an inverse relationship between fruit size, total yield and fruit total
solids content. Dry matter content of the fruit increases with the salinity of the
root environment (Fanasca et al., 2007). This is explained as a ‘­concentration’
e­ffect, because fruit enlargement (fresh weight increase) is suppressed by
 limited water uptake as a result of salt stress.


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

Light

As for many other crops, a linear relationship between cumulative intercepted
PAR, dry mass production and yield has been reported. The slope of this re-
lationship is the LUE, expressed in g dry mass per MJ of intercepted PAR (see
above). In Dutch tomato production it has been observed that fresh tomato
yield per unit of light is lower in autumn than in spring. Two main reasons are
a lower leaf area index and lower greenhouse CO2 concentration in autumn
compared with spring.
      A rule of thumb for estimating the effects of light on production often used
in practice is the ‘one-percent rule’, stating that 1% reduction in light will reduce
production by 1%. For tomato, this value varies between 0.7% and 1% (Marcelis
et al., 2006). The effect on fruit fresh weight is stronger than on plant dry weight
and the relative effect of radiation decreases at low temperatures, low CO2 con-
centrations and at high light levels. Despite its simplicity, the one-percent rule
often gives close estimates of the consequences of light loss on tomato yield.
A light requirement equal to or higher than 30 mol/m2/day (1 MJ/m2 natural
PAR = 4.6 mol/m2 = 71.9 klxh = 6640 ft-c, while for HPS 1 MJ/m2 PAR = 5
mol/m2 = 118 klxh = 10,970 ft-c; 1 J = 1 W/s; 1 kWh = 3.6 MJ) is reported
for a tomato culture, while a light integral of 4.8– 6.0 mol/m2/day is gener-
ally favourable for tomato seedling production, which corresponds to a light
intensity of 83 μmol/m2/s during a photoperiod of 16–20 h. Under low light
conditions, initiation of the first inflorescence is delayed, as more leaves are ini-
tiated prior to the inflorescence, and reduced flower development and flower
108                              E. Heuvelink et al.


abortion is ­observed. In commercial practice, fruit set could temporarily be im-
proved under low light by removing some young leaves (competing sink organs
for assimilate).
     Light can play an indirect or direct role in regulating source–sink relation-
ships involved in allocation of photo-assimilate within the growing plant. The
light intensity received by the plant affects the quantity of assimilates available
to the plant organs and thus their degree of sink competition. Light also dir-
ectly stimulates tomato fruit growth, due to mechanisms other than photo-
synthesis. This can be interpreted as a direct influence of light on tomato fruit
sink strength. Fruit illumination stimulates cell division but has no detectable
effect on fruit size, suggesting that effects of cell division are compensated by
effects on cell expansion (Okello et al., 2015). In field tomato crops grown in
summer sunlight over mulches, it was reported that an upwardly reflected far-
red:red (FR:R) ratio higher than the ratio in incoming sunlight would signal
the growing plant to partition more of its new photosynthate to the shoot and
fruit growth, while an FR:R ratio lower than that in incoming sunlight would
favour partitioning to the root (Kasperbauer and Kaul, 1996).

Supplemental lighting (SL) and photoperiod
For northern countries, the use of SL for greenhouse crops to secure flowering
and fruit set in the winter is successful when there is shortage of assimilates
(lower source than sink strength; see ‘Source–sink ratio’, p. 106). Early works
showed that SL during the winter increased yield by 70–106% compared with
natural light and sustained a minimal weekly yield of 1 kg/m2 from November
to February (Dorais and Gosselin, 2002; Dorais et al., 2017). Increasing SL
from 100 to 150 μmol/m2/s gave an additional 20–36% yield increase, which
has been related to a higher number of fruits instead of a higher fruit size. The
use of SL for greenhouse-grown fruit vegetables, including tomato, has been
detailed in recent reviews (Lu and Mitchell, 2016; Dorais et al., 2017).
     High-pressure sodium (HPS) gaseous discharge lamps are most commonly
used but LEDs are receiving more and more attention. Advantages of LED
lighting are as follows (Morrow, 2008; Persoon and Hogewoning, 2014; Lu
and Mitchell, 2016; Dorais et al., 2017).

•     More efficient in transferring electricity into light. LEDs (95% red, 5%
      blue) have reached an efficiency of 2.3 μmol/J electricity, whereas for the
      best HPS lamps this is 1.85 μmol/J, hence LED lamps are about 35% more
      efficient. Efficiencies reported by LED manufacturers vary between 1.4
      and 2.7 μmol/J electricity, or even 3.1 umol/J for red LEDs.
•     Adjustable spectrum (light quality) that allows optimization for photosyn-
      thesis and plant form and function.
•     Hardly any radiative heat emission, so lamps can be placed close to the
      plants (e.g. interlighting).
•     Very long life (> 50,000 hours).
                             Crop Growth and Yield                         109


•   Less light pollution (human-eye light sensitivity depends on colour; yellow
    most sensitive).
•   Good safety characteristics.

     Because growers are used to HPS lamps, they sometimes feel that transi-
tion to LEDs gives disadvantages because the head of the plant needs additional
heating to maintain an acceptable development rate. On the other hand, the
‘coldness’ of LED light has the advantage that addition of light is separated
from addition of heat, which makes it possible to bring the lamps between the
crop for interlighting (see next section). The main limitation for the applica-
tion of LED light in greenhouses is the high investment costs (Persoon and
Hogewoning, 2014; Nelson and Bugbee, 2014).

Canopy interlighting
Conventionally, commercial greenhouses apply HPS lamps as an SL source
above the crop canopy. Plants are known to benefit from light distributed
evenly throughout the crop canopy. In the high-wire tomato cultivation
system with high plant density, most of the SL is intercepted by the upper
part of the plant canopy. A recently developed SL technique to overcome this
problem is interlighting, where some of the lamps are placed within the crop
canopy to give light to the middle or lower part of the canopy. When grown
under top lighting, leaves low in the canopy have a low photosynthetic cap-
acity because they acclimate to low light conditions. However, with inter-
lighting this acclimation happens to a lesser extent and the lower leaves stay
more productive. Interlighting reduces loss of light due to crop reflection
towards the sky, which corresponds to approximately 6–7% of the incident
irradiance. It also reduces loss of light due to crop transmittance towards
the floor, which can be in the order of 5–10% (LAI of 3–4 with an extinction
­coefficient of 0.75). Interlighting with low-wattage HPS lamps was first
 tested experimentally with success in Finland and Norway, where increases in
 annual production in the order of 10–20% were found. The popular twin-row
 system (narrow row) often used in tomato production in northern regions,
 together with the high operating temperature of HPS lamps (> 200°C)
 resulting in a significant near-infrared (NIR) heat radiation, makes HPS
 unsuitable for interlighting.
      In order to take advantages of both HPS and LED SL, hybrid systems have
 shown great potential for greenhouse crops. For example, an HPS and LED
 hybrid system resulted in a 20% higher yield for two tomato cultivars com-
 pared with top HPS lighting only (Moerkens et al., 2016). However, produc-
 tion under LEDs was lower than HPS when four lighting treatments (PPFD
 170 μmol/m2/s) were compared: (i) top lighting with HPS or (ii) LED; (iii) top
hybrid lighting with HPS in combination with LED lighting (50/50) above the
crop; and (iv) HPS above the crop in 50/50 combination with LED between the
canopy (interlighting) (Dueck et al., 2012b).
110                             E. Heuvelink et al.


     To optimize the intra-canopy lighting system, the positioning of LED lamps
should also be considered. By using a three-dimensional (3D) light model in com-
bination with a 3D model of a tomato crop to simulate the 3D plant structure
and light distribution for an interlighting system, LEDs shining slightly upward
(20 degrees) increased light absorption and LUE relative to horizontally beaming
LEDs, which could avoid loss of light to the ground (De Visser et al., 2014).
     Using LEDs as light sources for interlighting raises questions about the
optimal light spectrum within the crop. Using narrow-band LED light sources
provides possibilities for lighting with efficient spectra for photosynthesis and
plant development. There is little variation in the photosynthetic effective-
ness of photons of different wavelengths; though red light has the highest
quantum efficiency (McCree, 1972), blue light plays a key role in control-
ling stomatal regulation (Hlavinka et al., 2013), whereas the ratio of red to
far-red light is known to control stem elongation (Franklin and Whitelam,
2005). The presence of blue light in the LED spectrum delayed stomata
closure during water deficit (Kotiranta et al., 2015). It was reported for high-
wire greenhouse tomato that interlighting with varying red (627 nm), blue
(450 nm) or far-red (730 nm) ratio altered leaf photosynthesis and stomatal
properties but did not affect plant productivity expressed by fruit number and
total fruit fresh weight (Gomez and Mitchell, 2016), which can be explained
by the presence of natural irradiance that dilutes the spectral effects of LED
lighting. Although the ‘optimal’ light spectrum for interlighting in tomato is
not known, a general conclusion from sole-source light-quality research is
that 5–10% of total PPFD needs to be blue. Furthermore, the optimum light
spectrum for various plant growth processes such as leaf and fruit growth
may be different, as manipulating light spectral distribution with LEDs in the
vertical profile of the canopy has a large influence on plant growth and de-
velopment (Guo et al., 2016).

Photoperiod
It is important to take into account that a tomato plant grown under SL needs
a minimum dark period of about 6 h (Dorais and Gosselin, 2002). When ex-
posed to continuous light (CL), tomato plants show a set of characteristic
symptoms, of which interveinal mottled chlorosis starting at the leaf/leaflet
base is the most distinctive. It was hypothesized that CL implies continuous en-
ergy supply for photosynthesis (energy component) and continuous signalling
to the photoreceptors (signalling component); both could play a role inducing
injury (Vélez-Ramírez, 2014). The CL-induced injury could be photo-oxidative
damage, early senescence and/or photosynthetic down-regulation (feedback
inhibition) (Dorais et al., 1995). A dominant locus on chromosome 7 of wild
tomato species (known to be tolerant to CL) that confers CL tolerance and the
type III light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b binding protein 13 (CAB-13) gene has
been identified as a major factor responsible for the tolerance (Vélez-Ramírez,
2014). Introgressing the tolerance into modern tomato hybrid lines resulted
                                Crop Growth and Yield                            111


in up to 20% yield increase. Hence, it was proposed that CL-induced injury
in tomato arises from retrograde signals that counteract signals derived from
the cellular developmental programme that promote chloroplast development,
such that chloroplast development cannot be completed, resulting in the chlor-
otic phenotype (Vélez-Ramírez, 2014).

Diffuse light
Solar light is composed of a diffuse component and a direct component. Diffuse
light arises from the scattering of light by molecules or larger particles in the
atmosphere and comes from many directions simultaneously; direct light ar-
rives in a straight line from the sun without being scattered. Many studies have
reported that plants, including tomato, use diffuse light more efficiently than
direct light (Mercado et al., 2009; Li et al., 2014). Under Dutch conditions, dif-
fuse glass cover increased year-round tomato production by 8–11% (Dueck
et al., 2012a). Only diffuse covering materials, developed in recent years,
increase the diffuseness of light without affecting total light transmission
(Hemming et al., 2014). Under PE the fraction of diffuse light is higher than
under glass; however, glass generally obtains a higher total light transmission.
     Diffuse light creates a more homogeneous light profile (both vertically and
horizontally) in the canopy than direct light. It exhibits a lower light extinc-
tion coefficient than direct light (Li et al., 2014), hence diffuse light penetrates
deeper into the canopy. Diffuse light also results in a more homogeneous light
distribution as less sunflecks occur (Fig. 4.9). High light levels usually lead to


 (A)                                        (B)




Fig. 4.9. Light distribution in a tomato canopy in a conventional clear glasshouse
(direct light, A) and diffuse glasshouse (diffuse light, B) on a clear day. Light is
more homogeneously distributed under diffuse cover (B) compared with clear
cover (A) where many sunflecks in the middle and lower part of the canopy occur.
(Photograph courtesy of Wageningen UR Greenhouse Horticulture.)
112                              E. Heuvelink et al.


photosynthetic saturation and a decrease in LUE, which often occurs on the
top canopy leaves under direct light. Diffuse light effectively mitigates the light
saturation constraint by more evenly distributing light among all leaves in the
canopy and therefore leads to a more efficient use of light. Diffuse light also
results in a lower leaf temperature (3–5°C) and less photo-inhibition of top
leaves in the middle of clear days (Li et al., 2014).
     Besides the direct effect of a more homogeneous distribution of diffuse
light described above, there is also an indirect effect resulting from acclima-
tion. Since diffuse light penetrates deeper into the canopy, the lower leaves
receive on average a higher light intensity, which leads to a higher total ni-
trogen and chlorophyll content and hence a higher photosynthetic capacity
in these lower leaves. Acclimation to diffuse light also includes acclimation of
leaf morphology, which affects light interception and, consequently, photosyn-
thesis. Tomato plants grown under diffuse light showed a lower specific leaf
area (SLA), which indicates thicker leaves, as well as a higher leaf area index
(LAI) mainly caused by a greater leaf width.
     A simulation study showed for Dutch greenhouse conditions that diffuse
glass increased crop photosynthesis by 7.2%; this increase mainly resulted
from a better horizontal light distribution (33% of the total effect), whereas
improved vertical light distribution and acclimation were each responsible for
21–23% of the total effect (Li et al., 2014).


Carbon dioxide

 CO2 is the substrate for photosynthesis, and a higher concentration increases
the rate of diffusion of CO2 into the leaf and therefore gross leaf and crop
 photosynthesis. It also increases photosynthesis, because of suppressing
 photorespiration (see above). Photosynthetic rate, growth and yield show a
 saturation-type of response to CO2. The relative increase in crop growth and
yield (X, % per 100 μmol/mol) caused by additional CO2 at certain CO2 con-
 centrations (C, μmol/mol) can be roughly estimated for indeterminate tomato
 grown under normal greenhouse conditions by the following rule of thumb:
 X = (1000/C)2 × 1.5 (Nederhoff, 1994). In (semi-)closed greenhouses, increased
rates of photosynthesis due to the higher CO2 concentrations are primarily
­responsible for the yield increase of 10–20% (De Gelder et al., 2012).
     For several species, including tomato, increases in RGR at elevated CO2
 were correlated with the relative increase in NAR and partly counter-
 acted by a decrease in LAR, because of decreased SLA. Total fresh and dry
 weight, plant height and stem thickness of young tomato plants increased
 with elevated CO2 without affecting the root-to-shoot ratio (Li et al., 2007).
 However, Wang et al. (2009) observed an increased root-to-shoot ratio
 under elevated CO2 (800 μmol/mol versus 350 μmol/mol), which agrees with
the functional equilibrium (see above). Increased assimilation rate, ­decreased
                                Crop Growth and Yield                            113


stomatal conductance and transpiration rate as well as higher total dry mass,
fruit set and higher yield were observed at 700 μmol/mol CO2 concentration
compared with 500 μmol/mol (Mamatha et al., 2014). Raising CO2 concen-
tration to 1000 μmol/mol increased yield by up to 84% compared with 400
μmol/mol (Khan et al., 2013). CO2 concentration does not affect appearance
rate of leaves and trusses and has no direct effect on dry matter allocation,
as sink strength rather than source strength determines the assimilate par-
titioning (see ‘Biomass Partitioning’, pp. 98–106). Indirectly, however, CO2
enrichment in tomato plants increases fruit set (Fig. 3.5) and thus dry matter
allocation to the fruits.
     From experimental observations, increasing CO2 concentration from
360 to 720 μmol/mol increased the photosynthetic rate of young tomato
by 55% (Li et al., 2007), while CO2 increase from 400 to 1000 μmol/mol in-
creased the photosynthesis rate of the lower foliage by up to 100% (Bencze
et al., 2011). An increase of 100 μmol/mol in CO2 concentration could
reduce stomatal ­conductance of tomato by about 3% (Nederhoff, 1994).
Despite the increased stomatal resistance at elevated CO2, the intercellular
CO2 concentration is kept high under CO2 atmosphere enrichment which
maintains high photosynthesis. No significant effect of CO2 concentration
on average leaf temperature was established, except under very low radi-
ation (Nederhoff, 1994).

Acclimation
Although photosynthesis shows an initial higher short-term response to CO2
enrichment, the long-term response often declines markedly (Besford, 1993)
(Fig. 4.10). The long-term CO2 acclimation of C3 plants is related to a substan-
tial reprogramming of gene expression (Fukayama et al., 2009) in response
to metabolic changes. Environmental, genetic or management practices that
limit the development of sink strength predispose plants to a greater acclima-
tion of photosynthetic capacity and lessen the stimulation of photosynthetic
carbon uptake by growth at elevated CO2 concentration (Foyer et al., 2012).
In fact, elevated CO2 concentrations in a semi-closed greenhouse did not cause
feedback inhibition in a high-producing tomato crop, because the plants had
sufficient sink organs (fruits) to utilize the extra assimilates (Qian et al., 2012).
Different responses observed on young and mature plants and under different
environmental conditions (e.g. light, photoperiod, CO2, temperature) clearly
showed the influence of the source-to-sink balance on the acclimation of
photosynthetic capacity to elevated CO2 and therefore degree of stimulation of
CO2 uptake. Although genetic factors play an important role in photosynthetic
response to high CO2, the down-regulation of transcripts encoding RuBisCO
and other proteins associated with CO2 fixation and an up-regulation of those
encoding proteins involved in RuBP regeneration and starch synthesis is a
common response to long-term growth at elevated CO2 concentration (Leakey
et al., 2009; Foyer et al., 2012).
114                                            E. Heuvelink et al.



                               30



                               25



                               20




       Pmax (μmol CO2 /m2/s)
                               15



                               10



                               5



                               0

                                    24   30      40            50          60   70
                                              Plant age (days from sowing)

Fig. 4.10. Light-saturated rate of photosynthesis, Pmax (1500 μmol/m2/s) of the
unshaded fifth leaf of tomato plants at various stages of development. Plants grown
in 340 μmol/mol CO2 (,  ) or in 1000 μmol/mol CO2 (—, ) and measured in
300 μmol/mol CO2 (, —) or in 1000 μmol/mol CO2 (, ). (Reprinted from Besford,
1993, Vegetatio 104/105, 444, with permission from Kluwer Academic Publishers.)


Growing environment
The higher rates of photosynthesis and assimilation production of plants grown
under CO2 enrichment is also related to enhanced nutrient demands and a re-
duced C/N ratio (Li et al., 2007). Although RuBisCO acclimation at high CO2
may save nitrogen, the increase of nitrogen use efficiency typically observed is
driven by enhanced CO2 uptake rather than by the saving and redistribution of
leaf nitrogen (Leakey et al., 2009). Acclimation of plants to elevated CO2 also
improves the water use efficiency by reducing stomatal conductance and tran-
spiration (Leakey et al., 2009; Takagi et al., 2009; Bencze et al., 2011). Besides,
under elevated CO2 levels, tomato plants may suffer greater damage from herb-
ivorous insects because of their reduced resistance and tolerance caused by the
suppression of the jasmonic acid signalling pathway, an important hormone
involved in plant defence against chewing insects (Guo et al., 2012). Increase
in the potential crop losses of field tomato due to higher weed competition
under elevated CO2 may also occur (Valerio et al., 2013).
                               Crop Growth and Yield                           115


Temperature

Temperature primarily influences tomato yield because it influences plant de-
velopment (see Chapter 3) through processes such as leaf initiation rate, leaf
area development, pollen quality and hence fruit set. Besides, temperature
has a direct influence on plant metabolism (e.g. photosynthesis, respiration,
sink activity) and thus affects crop growth and yield. Yield potential reduces
at temperatures above 26°C, with fruit set being one of the first processes
that is negatively influenced by supra-optimal temperatures (see Chapter 3).
The effect of temperatures around the optimal one on the growth of closed
­canopies is mainly through maintenance respiration. The rate of maintenance
 respiration more or less doubles with a 10°C rise in temperature. In the long
 term, temperature effect on crop maintenance respiration rate is small. At cool
 temperatures a heavier crop will compensate for a lower respiration rate per
 unit of biomass, whereas at warmer temperatures biomass is reduced, which
 in turn compensates for the increase in respiration rate per unit of biomass
 (Heuvelink, 1999).
      Average fruit size decreases with temperature, being a consequence of in-
 creased truss appearance rate and accelerated fruit development (including
 reduction of the ripening time; see Chapter 3). Hence at higher temperatures
 an almost similar amount of assimilates has to be distributed over a larger
 amount of fruit, resulting in a lower average fruit weight when temperature is
 increased from 17°C to 26°C.
      The optimum temperature for vegetative growth is 18–25°C, while the
 truss appearance rate increases almost linearly when temperature increases
 from 17°C to 27°C. At temperatures of 17–23°C, the ratio between vegeta-
 tive and generative growth over a long growth period is independent of the
 average temperature (De Koning, 1989). The optimal temperature for anthesis
 is 18–20°C.

Chilling temperatures
As tomato is a tropical species, it is sensitive to chilling temperature. No growth
occurs below 12°C and long-term exposure to these low temperatures causes
chilling injury. For field crops, low-temperature exposure in combination with
high irradiance, as found during the early growth season in California, causes
a rapid and severe inhibition of photosynthesis. Several elements that con-
tribute to this inhibition have been identified and all may ultimately arise from
the photosynthetic production of highly reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Apel
and Hirt, 2004). ROS formation occurs when the photosynthetic light-driven
electron transport chain exceeds demand by the slowly turning Calvin cycle
resulting in photo-inhibition, which is manifested in damage to the D1 protein
of photosystem II. Under moderately low temperature and light as observed in
several European countries during spring, photo-inhibition may not occur, but
due to cessation of growth and development a reduced demand for photo-as-
similates occurs, resulting in carbohydrate leaf accumulation and changes of
116                              E. Heuvelink et al.


the starch and soluble sugar partitioning. Consequently, sucrose synthesis in
the cytoplasm will cease and may cause feedback inhibition on the reduction
of phosphoglyceric acid in the Calvin cycle. Moreover, Calvin cycle turnover
rates will decrease for thermodynamic reasons (Venema et al., 2005). As neg-
ligible demand for NADPH occurs under low temperature, the photochemical
quenching decreases (Havaux, 1987) and the non-photochemical quenching
through the xanthophyll cycle increases. Alternatives routes such as photorespir-
ation and cyclic electron transport around PSI are also involved in protecting
the photosynthetic apparatus from over-excitation. Upon long-term chilling,
the specific activity of RuBisCO declines in parallel with photosynthesis rates
in tomato (Brüggemann et al., 1994). Due to the low turnover rates of tomato
RuBisCO (Besford et al., 1985), particularly at low temperatures, inactivated
enzyme molecules accumulate in the chloroplast, which increases the plant’s
susceptibility to over-excitation by light and low temperature. When irrevers-
ible RuBisCO inactivation occurs, Calvin cycle rates decrease and plants are not
able to benefit from better temperatures (Venema et al., 2005). For example,
exposing young tomato plants during 9 days at high day and low night tem-
peratures (25°C/9°C compared with 25°C/15°C) caused a reduced capacity
for CO2 assimilation, which decreased the utilization of NADPH (Liu et al.,
2012). Specifically, this reduction was accompanied by stomatal limitation of
CO2 supply and decline in RuBisCO activity at the transcriptional level. Soluble
sugars and starch content and sucrose synthase activity increased under low
night temperatures (Qi et al., 2011).
     Respiration – a vital component of plant metabolism, providing energy
and carbon skeletons for biosynthesis, cell maintenance and active transport
in plants – is one of the most important metabolic processes in chilling acclima-
tion (Shi et al., 2013). It has been observed that plants capable of maintaining
a similar respiration rate under different temperatures are better adapted to
chilling (Atkin et al., 2006). Flexible changes in both the plant mitochondrial
electron transport chain and cytosolic glycolysis cooperatively control chilling
tolerance in tomato plants (Shi et al., 2013). For chilling-sensitive species such
as tomato, the circadian rhythm controlling the activity of SPS and nitrate re-
ductase (NR), key control points of carbon and nitrogen metabolism in plant
cells, is delayed by chilling treatments (Jones et al., 1998). The mistiming in the
regulation of SPS and NR, and perhaps other key metabolic enzymes under
circadian regulation, underlies the chilling sensitivity of photosynthesis in to-
mato. Moreover, it has been observed that low temperature (6°C for 5 days) al-
tered the membrane lipid composition of tomato chloroplast and decreased the
number of granal thylakoids but had no effect on the total content of protein
(Novitskaya and Trunova, 2000). The possible role of variation in membrane
lipid composition as a causal factor in chilling sensitivity of several species has
been noted by several authors (Somerville, 1995; Venema et al., 2005). On the
other hand, tomato under chilling conditions appears incapable of ­optimal
regulation of stomatal conductance, resulting in high transpiration and wilting.
                                                                     Crop Growth and Yield                                                117


 Suboptimal temperatures
 Under field conditions, photosynthesis decrease was observed when day
 t­emperature was reduced from 25ºC to 16ºC (Venema et al., 1999a, b).
  A reduction in the night temperature from 14ºC to 6°C, combined with a day
  temperature of 19ºC, did not affect net photosynthesis on a leaf area basis,
  while photosynthesis on a fresh leaf weight basis decreased under lower night
  temperatures, due to increasing leaf thickness (Van de Dijk and Maris, 1985).
  The RGR on tomato plants is reduced at suboptimal averaged temperatures and
  at low night temperatures, which is correlated with the LAR decrease. NAR is
  not affected by night temperature, while LAR reduction under low night tem-
  peratures is correlated with the SLA reduction. Suboptimal temperatures pro-
  duce thicker leaves (reduced SLA) due to larger cells and starch accumulation
  (Venema et al., 1999 a, b). This is especially of importance for young plants,
  where thicker leaves result in less light interception and consequently a lower
  relative growth rate. Under suboptimal day/night temperatures of 17°C/14°C,
  suppression of the shoot growth rates and leaf area expansion compared with
  optimal 22°C/18°C temperatures was not due to restriction in the rates of net
  CO2 assimilation but rather related to hormonal signalling such as abscisic
acid, auxin and salicylic acid (Ntatsi et al., 2013). Temperature can also modu-
late stomatal responses to water deficits and to ABA (Correia et al., 1999), as
observed in low-temperature-tolerant wild species (Venema et al., 2005).
       In greenhouse tomato production, energy input is an important aspect
regarding sustainability (economics and CO2 emission). Within the culti-
vated tomato, there is only little genetic variation in response to temperature,
which hampers breeding for equal production and quality at lower temper-
atures. However, in wild tomato species (e.g. Solanum pennellii, S. hirsutum)
low-­temperature tolerance is present (Fig. 4.11). It has been shown that the
­decrease in SLA at lower temperature in cv. ‘Moneymaker’ was related to the
 accumulation of non-structural carbohydrates (soluble sugars + starch),

 (A)                                               (B)                                                (C)
                0.20                                                 0.5                                            500




                                                  NAR (mg/cm /day)
                                                                     0.4                                            400




RGR (g/g/day)                                                                                         LAR (cm /g)
                0.15                              2
                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                    300

                                                                     0.2                                            200
                0.10

                                                                     0.1                                            100

                0.05                                                 0.0                                             0
                       10      15     20     25                            10      15     20     25                   10      15     20     25
                            Temperature (°C)                                    Temperature (°C)                           Temperature (°C)

Fig. 4.11. Effect of temperature on (A) RGR, (B) NAR and (C) LAR of seedlings of
S. lycopersicum ‘Moneymaker’ (£) and S. pennellii LA716 (¾). (J.H. Venema, A. Van
der Ploeg and E. Heuvelink, unpublished.)
118                             E. Heuvelink et al.


which was much less pronounced in more cold-tolerant related wild tomato
species (Venema et al., 1999a, b).

Supra-optimal temperatures
Over a wide range, temperature has only a minor effect on gross photosyn-
thesis of tomato. Temperature affects mainly the assimilate demand by the
fruit (see ‘Biomass Partitioning’, pp. 98–106) without changing photosyn-
thesis rate in the range of 15–25°C. Full acclimation of the photosynthetic
apparatus of mature leaves to altered temperature requires at least several
days. Stomatal conductance increases exponentially with temperature over
the range of 15–35°C, even when assimilation rate decreased at high meas-
urement temperature (Bunce, 2000). Below these ranges, photosynthesis in-
creases with temperature because of the increased rates of the light reaction
and carboxylation, but net CO2 assimilation is depressed by the increase in dark
respiration and photorespiration.
     Based on detailed tomato canopy CO2 gas exchange measurements at
supra-optimal temperatures and high CO2 levels (300, 600, 900 and 1200
μmol/m2/s for 20–33°C and 400, 700 and 1000 μmol CO2/mol), the tempera-
ture that maximized gross crop photosynthesis (Pgc) was predicted, showing a
clear shift to higher optimum temperatures at elevated CO2 levels (Fig. 4.12)
(Körner et al., 2009). Compared with leaf photosynthesis, crop photosynthesis
had a lower temperature optimum (the difference could be several degrees),
and the shift in optimum temperature from a low to a high CO2 level was lower
for a canopy compared with a leaf. Therefore, optimizing the leaf photosyn-
thetic rate in model-based greenhouse climate control would not result in
optimum crop photosynthesis.
     Supra-optimal temperatures can cause severe damage to the photosyn-
thetic apparatus. Generally, high temperatures reduced photosynthesis by
changing the structural organization of thylakoids, resulting in the loss of
grana stacking or its swelling (Wahid et al., 2007) and down-regulation of PSII
activity (Ogweno et al., 2008). Decreases in RuBisCO and in PSII activities are
the main factors involved in photosynthesis limitation resulting from supra-­
optimal temperatures (Zhang et al., 2012). In tomato genotypes differing in heat
tolerance, reduction in the CO2 assimilation rate was not related to stomatal
limitation (Camejo et al., 2010) but rather the result of effects on the Calvin
cycle and PSII functioning, while an increased chlorophyll a:b ratio and a de-
creased chlorophyll-to-carotenoids ratio was observed in the tolerant wild geno-
types as sun-type chloroplasts. The heat-sensitive step of the sensitive genotype
appeared to be the maximum rate of electron transport as a consequence of the
activation of alternative pathways. However, when plants of a heat-sensitive
genotype were adapted during 30 days to 35°C, net rate of photosynthesis was
not negatively affected by 20 min at 35°C compared with the 25°C control
plants (Camejo et al., 2010). As fruit set declines under excessive temperature,
lower fruit sink strength may decrease the export of photo-assimilates from
                                                Crop Growth and Yield                       119


           (A)                                                (B)
                                 60                            60




           Pgc (µmol CO2/m2/s)
                                 40                            40



                                 20                            20



                                  0                             0
                                      20   24   28    32            20     24    28    32

           (C)                                                (D)

                                 60                            60




           Pgc (µmol CO2/m2/s)
                                 40                            40



                                 20                            20



                                  0                             0
                                      20   24   28    32            20     24    28    32
                                       Temperature (°C)                 Temperature (°C)

Fig. 4.12. Measured and fitted (negative-exponential) gross crop photosynthesis (Pgc)
values for tomato as a function of temperature at two CO2 concentrations (400 (™) or
1000 (˜) μmol CO2/mol) at four photosynthetic photon flux densities (A: 300, B: 600,
C: 900 or D: 1200 μmol/m2/s). Data were fitted using quadratic functions. Standard
errors (±SE) were smaller than the symbols used. Reprinted from Körner et al., 2009,
by permission of Taylor and Francis Ltd (http://www.tandfonline.com)


source (leaf) to sink (fruit) organs, resulting in photosynthesis feedback inhib-
ition and starch accumulation in the leaf (Zhang et al., 2012).

Temperature and partitioning
High temperature enhances early fruit growth at the expense of vegetative
growth. At high temperatures, the rate of plant development (new leaves and
trusses) is higher (see Chapter 3). Therefore, growing young plants (only a few
trusses have appeared) at high temperatures will increase partitioning into the
fruits, as it increases the number of growing fruits on the plant. The strong
assimilate demand by the growing fruits at the higher temperatures causes
not only reduced leaf growth but also delay of growth of newly set fruits and
even flower abortion. As a consequence, after some time total sink strength of
120                              E. Heuvelink et al.


the fruits is low and the plant recovers vegetatively and good-quality flowers
­develop. Subsequently, these flowers set fruit and form strong sinks, resulting
 in the onset of a second cycle of strong fruit growth. This leads to a more or
 less pronounced alternation of fruit growth and vegetative growth (De Koning,
 1989). These effects of temperature, however, should not be confused with a
 direct effect of temperature on dry matter allocation.
      Literature data are not conclusive on a possible direct effect of tempera-
 ture on partitioning in tomato. For example, partitioning towards the fruits
 was only improved a little when young producing tomato plants were exposed
 for 3 weeks at 24°C compared with 19°C (Heuvelink, 1995a). However, when
 a similar experiment was conducted for a period of 2 weeks during the anthesis
 of the sixth truss, the fraction of dry matter partitioned to the fruits was 0.68
 and 0.80 at 19°C and 23°C, respectively (De Koning, 1994).

Temperature integration
The long-term average temperature, rather than the day–night tempera-
ture regime, determines crop growth and yield in producing tomato crops.
Consequently, temperature integration up to 12 days with an amplitude of
6°C does not reduce yield once the canopy (LAI) is fully developed (De Koning,
1990); and under high CO2 enrichment (1000 μmol/mol) yield is hardly in-
fluenced by temperatures ranging between 16°C and 24°C (Heuvelink et al.,
2008). This great ability of a mature tomato crop to integrate (compensate
within a certain period) temperature offers good possibilities for saving energy
in greenhouse cultivation (see Chapter 9). For example, in spring, energy can
be saved by allowing the greenhouse to heat up above the desired long-term
average temperature by solar radiation during daytime, which is compensated
for by reduced heating during the night. Similarly, in periods with high wind
speed (high energy loss) the temperature set-point may be below the desired
average, to be compensated for by a higher than average set-point in periods
with low wind speed, reducing total heating costs. These control possibilities
are included in greenhouse climate computer software in modern facilities.


Humidity

Humidity (vapour pressure deficit (VPD) 0.2–1.0 kPa) has little effect, or higher
humidity increases photosynthesis. Pollination, fruit growth and development
of tomato are generally not influenced in this VPD range (Picken, 1984), while
an increase of VPD from 1 to 1.8 kPa could reduce plant growth of several
crops (Hoffman, 1979). Humidity can influence leaf photosynthesis through
its effect on stomatal conductance: low humidity may result in water stress
and (partial) stomatal closure. Under extreme conditions of low humidity
(1.5–2.2 kPa), there is a reduction of growth due to stomatal closure and
therefore reduced photosynthesis. Long-term high relative humidity is known
                                Crop Growth and Yield                             121


to induce abnormal stomatal functioning, bigger stomata and changed sto-
matal density in several plant species, including tomato (Fanourakis et al.,
2013; Arve and Torre, 2015). Carbon assimilation per se appears not to be
greatly affected by humidity in the range of 0.2–1.0 kPa unless leaf or plant
transpiration exceeds the water supply and water stress results (Grange and
Hand, 1987). Hence, photosynthesis is decreased by low humidity only in high
electrical conductivity (EC)- and/or water-stressed plants.
     High humidity is often prevented in greenhouses, as it increases the risk
of diseases (e.g. botrytis), especially in combination with a heterogeneous tem-
perature distribution such that water vapour condensates on the coldest parts.
It may also reduce yield; for example, 18–21% reduction at a VPD of 0.1 kPa
(high humidity) compared with a VPD of 0.5 kPa, which may be related to a
diminution of the leaf area due to a calcium deficiency in the foliage (Holder
and Cockshull, 1988) and a reduced fruit growth rate (Bakker, 1990). High
humidity may also reduce the ovule fertilization rate, due to a more difficult
release of the pollen. On the other hand, high humidity (misting) has been
used to partially mitigate the negative effect of high salinity in the root envir-
onment, by reducing the transpiration rate and thus the water demand (Li and
Stanghellini, 2001; Cuartero et al., 2006).
     Under Mediterranean conditions, VPD higher than 2 kPa during the hottest
hours of the day reduces fruit growth and fruit fresh weight, probably due to a
reduction of the fruit-stem water potential gradient. Under those conditions total
yield is also reduced by a decrease in fruit size (higher dry mass content). Moreover,
there is an increase in the number of fruit affected by blossom-end rot (BER), due
to a high foliage transpiration rate, thereby limiting the supply of xylem sap (cal-
cium) to the fruit. At high salinity (10 dS/m), depressing plant transpiration by
35% under the same solar radiation reduced the incidence of BER from 20% to
2% of the total yield and might enlarge fruit size, thereby improving fruit quality
and yield value (Stanghellini et al., 1998). Low VPD did not affect the enhanced
organoleptic quality of fruit grown under these high EC levels.


Salinity

In practice, water and salinity stresses are believed to favour generative devel-
opment in tomato. Young plants are often stressed to stimulate fruit growth
on the first truss. There is no proof that water and salinity stress directly influ-
ences partitioning, but influence in an indirect way by improving fruit set is well
known. Improved fruit set leads to more fruits, and a higher fruit number on the
plant will increase partitioning towards the fruits (Fig. 4.3). According to Dorais
et al. (2001b), at an EC of 6 dS/m, biomass and dry matter partitioning among
fruit, vegetative parts and roots were not affected by salinity. Nevertheless, EC of
10 dS/m reduced plant dry weight by 19% as compared with an EC of 2 dS/m but
did not influence dry matter partitioning. An EC of 17 dS/m, however, slightly
122                              E. Heuvelink et al.


reduced dry matter distribution to the fruits. On the other hand, for young
fruiting plants (first flower anthesis until harvest of the second truss) exposed
to a salinity of 8 dS/m, it was reported that salinity increased the sink strength
of tomato fruits due to an increase in the fruit ­sucrose synthase activity, while
both forms of invertase were not affected (Saito et al., 2009). Although salinity
reduced photosynthesis rate per unit leaf area, increased transport and distri-
bution of photo-assimilates to the fruits was measured.
     Depending on temperature, cultivar, the severity of salinity and the
duration of salinization, the number of trusses per plant as well as the
number of flowers per truss might be influenced by salinity. For example,
ECs of 4.6–8 dS/m reduced fruit yield because of a reduction in fruit size,
whereas an EC of 12 dS/m reduced both the number and size of fruit.
Salinities higher than 2.3–5.0 dS/m resulted in an undesirable yield reduc-
tion, while ECs of 3.5–9.0 dS/m improved tomato fruit quality (Dorais et al.,
2001a, b). In general, the yield and individual fruit weight of cultivars with
smaller fruit size would be less affected by high salinity than cultivars with
larger fruit.
     Reduction of growth under salt stress is due to both an osmotic stress (days
to weeks) and then an ionic stress (weeks to months), which provoke nutri-
tional imbalance and accumulation of toxic ions such as sodium. Reduction of
fruit growth and the final fruit size by an osmotic effect is due to a lower plant
water potential, which will reduce the water flow into the fruit and therefore
the rate of fruit expansion. A growth reduction of 6–10% for each 1 dS/m in-
crease is expected (Adams, 1991). Under salinity, stem internode length, plant
height and leaf area of tomato are reduced (Najla et al., 2009). It has been
proposed that shoot growth inhibition under salt stress may be regulated by
hormones or their precursors (Pérez-Alfocea et al., 2010). For example, root-lo-
calized induction of cytokinin biosynthesis modified both shoot hormonal and
ionic status, thus ameliorating salinity-induced decreases in growth and yield
under moderate salinity (Ghanem et al., 2011). Abscisic acid and the ethylene
precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) concentrations in-
creased in roots, xylem sap and leaves after 1 day and 15 days, respectively, of
salinization. The auxin concentration decreased in the leaves while it accumu-
lated in the roots. The auxin/cytokinin ratio in the leaves and roots may explain
both the salinity-induced decrease in shoot vigour and the shift in biomass al-
location to the roots (Albacete et al., 2008; Lovelli et al., 2012). Functional evi-
dence about the role of metabolic and hormonal inter-regulation of local sink
processes in controlling tomato fruit sink activity, growth and yield under sal-
inity have been shown (Albacete et al., 2014).
     Increasing water salinity (EC = 0.5 up to 15.7 dS/m) negatively affected
LAI, radiation use efficiency (RUE) and above-ground dry weight accumula-
tion, resulting in lower total and marketable yield (De Pascale et al., 2015).
Although the smaller leaf area of salinized plants was largely responsible
for reduced RUE, approximately 50% of this reduction was accounted for by
                               Crop Growth and Yield                           123


processes other than changed crop architecture, such as an increased stomatal
resistance, increased mesophyll resistance and other impaired metabolic func-
tions that may occur at high salinity. Interestingly, plants grown on long-term
salinized soils (exposed to > 20 years of salinization) had a slightly higher RUE
at a given EC of soil extract than plants grown on one-season salinization soil,
indicating that permanent modifications of the soil physical properties may
trigger physiological mechanisms of adaptation.
      A proportional decrease in leaf photosynthesis rate as salinity increased
has been reported (Romero-Aranda et al., 2001). However, a decline in crop
photosynthesis is primarily the result of a reduced leaf area (Heuvelink et al.,
2003). Photosynthetic performance of tomato under salinity varies among
genotypes and may be related to: (i) their capability for toxic ion exclusion and
maintenance of appropriate essential macronutrient concentrations in leaves;
and (ii) metabolic and diffusion limitations (Nebauer et al., 2013). Stomatal
closure and decreased mesophyll conductance (gm) initially limit photosyn-
thesis due to reduced CO2 availability but subsequently this low CO2 level can
lead to leaf metabolism changes (Nebauer et al., 2013). The mechanisms that
down-regulate gm under salinity are still unknown, though they may involve
regulation of proteins such as aquaporins or carbonic anhydrase (Nebauer
et al., 2013). Metabolic limitations are related to a reduction in active RuBisCO
as well as limited RuBP regeneration due to an inadequate ATP or NADPH
supply of enzymatic activities.

Mitigating salinity effects
Three cultural techniques that have proved useful in tomato to overcome, in
part, the negative effects of salinity are: (i) treatment of seedlings with drought
or NaCl, which ameliorates the adaptation of adult plants to salinity; (ii) mist
(increasing humidity) applied to tomato plants, improving vegetative growth
and yield in saline conditions; and (iii) grafting tomato cultivars on to appro-
priate rootstocks (Cuartero et al., 2006). In addition to enhancing tolerance
of tomato against salinity, rootstocks reduce infection by soil-borne pathogens
and relieve nutrient, water, thermal and pollutant stresses (Colla et al., 2010;
Schwatz et al., 2010). Elevated CO2 concentration may also alleviate the nega-
tive effect of salinity on photosynthesis and plant growth (Maggio et al., 2002;
Takagi et al., 2009). This effect was promoted under high sink-to-source ac-
tivity, probably owing to improvement of oxidative stress as well as the water
status through stomatal closure at high CO2 concentration (Takagi et al.,
2009).
     A significant consequence of climate change is the increased frequency
of stress combinations that plants are exposed to, especially of abiotic factors
such as salinity in combination with pathogenic microorganisms. Recent work
(Kissoudis et al., 2017) has revealed the differential influence of ethylene and
abscisic acid signalling pathways on tomato resistance to combined powdery
mildew and salt stress.
124                              E. Heuvelink et al.



CROP GROWTH MODELS

As seen in the previous sections, tomato crop growth is a complex phenom-
enon. Simulation models seem appropriate here, as these models have proved
to be successful tools in prediction and explanation of the behaviour of such
a complex, dynamic system as a growing crop. Models are powerful tools to
test hypotheses, to synthesize knowledge, to describe and understand complex
systems and to compare different scenarios. Furthermore, with a model, con-
ditions that cannot be attained experimentally can be evaluated, which may be
important in theoretical studies. Models may be used in decision support sys-
tems, greenhouse climate control and prediction and planning of production.
A model is a set of equations that represent the behaviour of a system. Often
descriptive and explanatory models are distinguished. Descriptive models, also
called statistical, regression, empirical or black-box models, reflect few or none
of the mechanisms that are the cause of the behaviour of a system, whereas
explanatory models consist of a quantitative description of these mechanisms
and processes. Crop models can also be distinguished into process-based (func-
tional) models and structural (architectural) models. The former represent
plant processes such as photosynthesis and leaf area expansion, whereas the
latter focus much more on developmental aspects (initiation of new organs,
morphogenesis). A more recent development is the combination of both ap-
proaches into so-called functional–structural plant models (FSPM).
      An overview of photosynthesis-based models for tomato is provided by
Marcelis et al. (1998). Two of these models are TOMGRO (Gary et al., 1995) and
TOMSIM (Heuvelink, 1999), which include most of the processes described
before (e.g. leaf and crop photosynthesis, light interception, biomass increase
and dry mass partitioning) and the developmental processes (e.g. truss ap-
pearance rate, fruit growth period) presented in Chapter 3. More recently,
process-based tomato crop growth models have been presented by: (i) Boote
and Scholberg (2006), who showed results obtained with the crop simula-
tion model CROPGRO-tomato with full C, N and water balance (Fig. 4.13);
(ii) Marcelis et al. (2009), who concluded that their mechanistic crop model accur-
ately simulates yield, growth, development and water and nutrient relations of
greenhouse-grown tomato in different climate zones; (iii) Wang et al. (2012),
who developed (by analysing the quantitative relationships between growth,
partitioning index and harvest index and physiological development time) a
mathematical model to estimate total dry matter accumulation, shoot dry
matter partitioning and yield for processing tomatoes; and (iv) Katerji et al.
(2013), who showed that the FAO AquaCrop model could adequately simu-
late final biomass and yield of tomato crops growing under non-stressed and
moderate water stress treatments, whereas yields were poorly simulated under
severe water stress treatments.
      FSPMs for a tomato crop have also been presented (Kang et al., 2011),
analysing tomato fruit set based on the quantitative link between source–sink
                                                                 Crop Growth and Yield                                                                  125


 (A)                                                                           (B)
                                 10                                                                          14




Fruit dm accumulation (g/frt)                                                 Fruit dry matter content (%)
                                 8                                                                           12

                                 6                                                                           10

                                 4                                                                            8

                                 2                                                                            6

                                 0                                                                            4
                                      0        200      400     600     800                                       0         200      400       600     800
                                          Degree days after anthesis (°Cd)                                            Degree days after anthesis (°Cd)

 (C)                                                                           (D)
                                200                                              100




Fruit fresh weight (g/frt)                                                    Fruit diameter (mm)
                                150                                                                          80

                                                                                                             60
                                100
                                                                                                             40
                                 50
                                                                                                             20

                                  0                                                                           0
                                      0    200     400      600     800                                           0        100      200      300       400
                                      Degree days after anthesis (°Cd)                                                    Fresh fruit weight (g/frt)

                                               G95    G96        H2O stress                                   N stress            Equation     Data

Fig. 4.13. (A) Dry matter accumulation, (B) dry matter concentration and (C) fresh
weight of tagged early tomato fruits versus degree-days after anthesis for four treatments
(G95 = Control 1995; G96 = Control 1996; H2O stress = irrigation was cut off 3
weeks prior to flowering of cluster used for fruit development, and fruit yield was 57.2
versus 74.3 t/ha, although there was a shallow water table; N stress = no N-fertilizer
applied, the crop accumulated 30 kg compared with 140 kg N/ha for well fertilized
crop, and yield was 22.9 versus 79.1 t/ha; and (D) Fruit diameter as a function of
fresh fruit weight. (Reprinted, with permission, from Boote and Scholberg, 2006.)


ratio and fruit set probability with the GreenLab FSPM. The impact of architec-
tural traits on total light absorption and biomass production under dynamic
conditions (e.g. up to 20% shoot dry mass increase by altering leaf angle) was
demonstrated in a dynamic FSPM (Chen et al., 2014) and earlier with a static
tomato FSPM (Sarlikioti, 2011).
     A novel knowledge-and-data-driven modelling (KDDM) approach for
simulating tomato plant growth that consists of two sub-models has been
developed (Fan et al., 2015). A GreenLab model was adopted as the knowl-
edge-driven sub-model and the radial basis function network as the data-
126                               E. Heuvelink et al.


driven sub-model. In comparison with the knowledge-driven model and
data-driven model alone, the KDDM approach presented several benefits in
predicting tomato yields. It effectively addressed situations of missing variables
or data and showed good flexibility in maximally utilizing domain knowledge
and data.



CONCLUSION

Genetics, environmental factors and crop management all affect tomato crop
growth and yield. Yield is determined by the canopy photo-assimilation, assimi-
late distribution within the plant and fruit dry matter content. One or several
of these yield components can be manipulated directly or indirectly by light (in-
tensity, day length, spectrum, diffusiveness), CO2, temperature, humidity and/or
water, and nutrient availability during cultivation. Cultural practices such as
planting density, leaf and fruit pruning also play a role. Better understanding
of the rate-limiting steps of the accumulation of dry matter in tomato fruit
would identify critical physiological processes that can be improved by plant
breeding or genetic engineering. Plant breeding may provide a long-term solu-
tion for yield and quality improvement under suboptimal growing conditions
such as low or high temperature, high salinity, or low light levels. Improvement
can also be made by a better integration of growing conditions and cultural
practices for an optimally balanced plant. In this context, crop modelling has
become a major research tool in horticulture. A number of descriptive and ex-
planatory models have been developed. These models can be used for yield and
quality prediction, climate and crop management, as well as economical and
policy analysis, and for teaching concepts.



REFERENCES

Acock, B., Charles-Edwards, D.A., Fitter, D.J., Hand, D.W., Ludwig, L.J., Wilson, J.W.
    and Withers, A.C. (1978) The contribution of leaves from different levels within
    a tomato crop to canopy net photosynthesis: an experimental examination of
    two canopy models. Journal of Experimental Botany 29, 815–827. doi: https://doi.
    org/10.1093/jxb/29.4.815.
Adams, P. (1991) Effects of increasing the salinity of the nutrient solution with
    major nutrients or sodium chloride on the yield, quality and composition of to-
    matoes grown in rockwool. Journal of Horticulture Science 66, 201–220. doi:
    10.1080/00221589.1991.11516145.
Albacete, A., Ghanem, M.E., Martínez-Andújar, C., Acosta, M., Sánchez-Bravo, J. et al.
    (2008 ) Hormonal changes in relation to biomass partitioning and shoot growth
    impairment in salinized tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants. Journal of
    Experimental Botany 59 , 4119–4131. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ern251.
                                  Crop Growth and Yield                                 127


Albacete, A., Cantero-Navarro, E., Balibrea, M.E., Großkinsky, D.K., de la Cruz González, M.
     et al. (2014) Hormonal and metabolic regulation of tomato fruit sink activity and
     yield under salinity. Journal of Experimental Botany 65, 6081–6095. doi: 10.1093/
     jxb/eru347.
Apel, K. and Hirt, H. (2004) Reactive oxygen species: metabolism, oxidative stress, and
     signal transduction. Annual Review of Plant Biology 55, 373–399. doi: 10.1146/
     annurev.arplant.55.031903.141701.
Arve, L.E. and Torre, S. (2015) Ethylene is involved in high air humidity promoted sto-
     matal opening of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) leaves. Functional Plant Biology
     42, 376–386. doi: 10.1071/FP14247.
Atkin, O.K., Scheurwater, I. and Pons, T.L. (2006) High thermal acclimation po-
     tential of both photosynthesis and respiration in two lowland Plantago species
     in contrast to an alpine congeneric. Global Change Biology 12, 500–515. doi:
     10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01114.x.
Bakker, J.C. (1990) Effects of day and night humidity on yield and fruit quality of glass-
     house eggplant (Solanum melongena L.). Journal of Horticultural Science 65, 747–753.
Beckles, D.M., Hong, N., Stamova, L. and Luengwilai, K. (2012) Biochemical fac-
     tors contributing to tomato fruit sugar content: a review. Fruits 67, 49–64. doi:
     10.1051/fruits/2011066.
Bencze, S., Keresztényi, I., Varga, B., Koszegi, B., Balla, K., Gémesné-Juhász, A. and
     Veisz, O. (2011) Effect of CO2 enrichment on canopy photosynthesis, water use
     efficiency and early development of tomato and pepper hybrids. Acta Agronomica
     Hungarica 59, 275–284. doi: 10.1556/AAgr.59.2011.3.12.
Bertin, N. (1995) Competition for assimilates and fruit position affect fruit set in inde-
     terminate greenhouse tomato. Annals of Botany 75, 55–65.
Besford, R.T. (1993) Photosynthetic acclimation in tomato plants grown in high CO2.
     Vegetatio 104/105, 441–448.
Besford, R.T., Withers, A.C. and Ludwig, L.J. (1985) Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
     activity and photosynthesis during leaf development in the tomato. Journal of
     Experimental Botany 36, 1530–1541. doi: 10.1093/jxb/36.10.1530.
Boote, K.J. and Scholberg, J.M.S. (2006) Developing, parameterizing, and testing of dy-
     namic crop growth models for horticultural crops. Acta Horticulturae 718, 23–34.
     doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2006.718.1.
Brüggemann, W., Klaucke, S. and Maas-Kantel, K. (1994) Long-term chilling of young
     tomato plants under low light – V. Kinetic and molecular properties of two key en-
     zymes of the Calvin cycle in Lycopersicon esculentum Mill. and L. peruvianum Mill.
     Planta 194, 160–168. doi: 10.1007/bf00196384.
Bunce, J.A. (2000) Acclimation of photosynthesis to temperature in eight cool and
     warm climate herbaceous C3 species: temperature dependence of parameters of a
     biochemical photosynthesis model. Photosynthesis Research 63, 59–67.
Camejo, D., Nicolas, E., Torres, W. and Alarcon, J.J. (2010) Differential heat-induced
     changes in the CO2 assimilation rate and electron transport in tomato (Lycopersicon
     esculentum Mill.). Journal of Horticultural Science & Biotechnology 85, 137–143.
Cavero, J., Plant, R.E., Shennan, C., Williams, J.R., Kiniry, J.R. and Benson, V.W. (1998)
     Application of epic model to nitrogen cycling in irrigated processing tomatoes
     under different management systems. Agricultural Systems 56, 391–414.
Chen, T.W., Nguyen, T.M.N., Kahlen, K. and Stützel, H. (2014) Quantification of the
     effects of architectural traits on dry mass production and light interception of
128                                 E. Heuvelink et al.


     ­tomato canopy under different temperature regimes using a dynamic functional–
      structural plant model. Journal of Experimental Botany 65, 6399–6410.
Cockshull, K.E., Graves, C.J. and Cave, C.R.J. (1992) The influence of shading on yield of
      glasshouse tomatoes. Journal of Horticultural Science 67, 11–24.
Colla, G., Rouphael, Y., Leonardi, C. and Bie, Z. (2010) Role of grafting in vegetable
      crops grown under saline conditions. Scientia Horticulturae 127, 147–155. doi:
      10.1016/j.scienta.2010.08.004.
Correia, M.J., Rodrigues, M.L., Osorio, M.L. and Chaves, M.M. (1999) Effects of growth
      temperature on the response of lupin stomata to drought and abscisic acid.
      Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 26, 549–559.
Cuartero, J., Boların, M.C., Asıns, M.J. and Moreno, V. (2006) Increasing salt tolerance in
      the tomato. Journal of Experimental Botany 57, 1045–1058. doi:10.1093/jxb/erj102.
Czarnowski, M. and Starzecki, W. (1990) Carbon dioxide exchange in tomato cluster
      peduncles and fruits. Folia Horticulturae 2, 29–39.
De Gelder, A., Dieleman, J.A., Bot, G.P.A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2012) An overview of
      climate and crop yield in closed greenhouses. Journal of Horticultural Science and
      Biotechnology 87, 193–202. doi: 10.1080/14620316.2012.11512852.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1989) The effect of temperature on fruit growth and fruit load of to-
      mato. Acta Horticulturae 248, 329–336. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.1989.248.40.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1990) Long-term temperature integration of tomato. Growth and de-
      velopment under alternating temperature regimes. Scientia Horticulturae 45, 117–127.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1993) Growth of a tomato crop: measurements for model valid-
      ation. Acta Horticulturae 328, 141–146.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1994) Development and dry matter distribution in glasshouse to-
      mato: a quantitative approach. Thesis, University of Wageningen, The Netherlands.
De Pascale, S., Maggio, A., Orsini, F., Stanghellini, C. and Heuvelink, E. (2015) Growth
      response and radiation use efficiency in tomato exposed to short-term and
      long-term salinized soils. Scientia Horticulturae 189, 139–149. doi: 10.1016/j.
      scienta.2015.03.042.
De Visser, P.H.B., Buck-Sorlin, G.H. and van der Heijden, G.W.A.M. (2014) Optimizing
      illumination in the greenhouse using a 3D model of tomato and a ray tracer.
      Frontiers in Plant Science 5, 48.
Decoteau, D.R (2007) Leaf area distribution of tomato plants as influenced by poly-
      ethylene mulch surface color. HortTechnology 17, 341–345.
Dorais, M. and Gosselin, A. (2002) Physiological response of greenhouse vegetable
      crops to supplemental lighting. Acta Horticulturae 580, 59–67.
Dorais, M., Yelle, S., Carpentier, R. and Gosselin, A. (1995) Adaptability of tomato and
      pepper leaves to changes in photoperiod: effects on the composition and function
      of the thylakoid membrane. Physiologa Plantarum 94, 692–700.
Dorais, M., Nguyen-Quoc, B., N’tchobo, H., D’Aoust, M.A., Foyer, C., Gosselin, A.
      and Yelle, S. (1999) What controls sucrose unloading in tomato fruits? Acta
      Horticulturae 487, 107–112.
Dorais, M., Papadopoulos, A.P. and Gosselin, A. (2001a) Greenhouse tomato fruit
      quality: the influence of environmental and cultural factors. Horticultural Reviews
      26, 239–319.
Dorais, M., Papadopoulos, A.P. and Gosselin, A. (2001b) Influence of electrical con-
      ductivity management on greenhouse tomato yield and fruit quality. Agronomie
      21, 367–383.
                                   Crop Growth and Yield                                  129


Dorais, M., Mitchell, A.C. and Kubota, C. (2017) Lighting greenhouse fruiting veget-
     ables. In: Lopez, R. and Runkle, E. (eds) Light Management in Controlled Environments.
     Meister Media Worldwide, Willoughby, Ohio.
Dueck, T., Janse, J., Li, T., Kempkes, F. and Eveleens, B. (2012a) Influence of diffuse
     glass on the growth and production of tomato. Acta Horticulturae 956, 75-82. doi:
     10.17660/ActaHortic.2012.956.6.
Dueck, T.A., Janse, J., Eveleens, B.A., Kempkes, F.L.K. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2012b)
     Growth of tomatoes under hybrid LED and HPS lighting. Acta Horticulturae 952,
     335–342. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2012.952.42.
Fan, X.R., Kang, M.Z., Heuvelink, E., De Reffye, P. and Hu, B.G. (2015), A knowledge-
     and-data-driven modeling approach for simulating plant growth: a case study on
     tomato growth. Ecological Modelling 312(C), 363–373.
Fanasca, S., Martino, A., Heuvelink, E. and Stanghellini, C. (2007) Effect of electrical
     conductivity, fruit pruning, and truss position on quality in greenhouse tomato
     fruit. Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology 82, 488–494.
Fanourakis, D., Heuvelink, E. and Carvalho, S.M.P. (2013) A comprehensive analysis of
     the physiological and anatomical components involved in higher water loss rates
     after leaf development at high humidity. Journal of Plant Physiology 170, 890– 898.
     doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2013.01.013.
Foyer, C.H., Neukermans, J., Queval, G., Noctor, G. and Harbinson, J. (2012)
     Photosynthetic control of electron transport and the regulation of gene expres-
     sion. Journal of Experimental Botany 63, 1637–1661. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers013.
Franklin, K. and Whitelam, G. (2005) Phytochromes and shade-avoidance responses in
     plants. Annals of Botany 96, 169–175.
Fukayama, H., Fukuda, T., Masumoto, C., Taniguchi, Y., Sakai, H. et al. (2009) Rice
     plant response to long term CO2 enrichment: gene expression profiling. Plant
     Science 177, 203–210. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2009.05.014.
Gary, C., Barczi, J.F., Bertin, N. and Tchamitchian, M. (1995) Simulation of individual
     organ growth and development on a tomato plant: a model and a user-friendly
     interface. Acta Horticulturae 399, 199–205.
Ghanem, M.E., Albacete, A., Smigocki, A.C., Frébort, I., Pospısilova, H. et al. (2011)
     Root-synthesized cytokinins improve shoot growth and fruit yield in salinized to-
     mato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants. Journal of Experimental Botany 62(1), 125–140.
     doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq266.
Gijzen, H. (1995) Interaction between CO2 uptake and water loss. In: Bakker, J.C., Bot,
     G.P.A., Challa, H. and van de Braak, N.J. (eds) Greenhouse Climate Control: An Integrated
     Approach. Wageningen Academic, Wageningen, The Netherlands, pp.51–62.
Gomez, C. and Mitchell, C.A. (2016) In search of an optimized supplemental lighting
     spectrum for greenhouse tomato production with intracanopy lighting. Acta
     Horticulturae 1134, 57–62.
Grange, R.L. and Hand, D.W. (1987) A review of the effects of atmospheric humidity
     on the growth of horticultural crops. Journal of Horticultural Science 62, 125–134.
Guo, H., Sun, Y., Ren, Q., Zhu-Salzman, K., Kang, L. et al. (2012) Elevated CO2 reduces the
     resistance and tolerance of tomato plants to Helicoverpa armigera by suppressing the
     JA signaling pathway. PLoS ONE 7(7), e41426. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041426.
Guo, X., Hao, X., Zheng, J.M., Little, C. and Khosla, S. (2016) Response of greenhouse
     mini-cucumber to different vertical spectra of LED lighting under overhead high
     pressure sodium and plasma lighting. Acta Horticulturae 1134, 87–94.
130                                  E. Heuvelink et al.


Havaux, M. (1987) Effects of chilling on the redox state of the primary electron
    ­acceptor q a of photosystem ii in chilling sensitive and resistant plant species. Plant
     Physiology & Biochemistry 25, 735–744.
Hemming, S., Mohammadkhani, V. and van Ruijven, J. (2014) Material technology
     of diffuse greenhouse covering materials – influence on light transmission, light
     scattering and light spectrum. Acta Horticulturae 1037, 883–896.
Herbers, K. and Sonnewald, U. (1998) Molecular determinants of sink strength. Current
     Opinion in Plant Biology 1, 207–216.
Heuvelink, E. (1995a) Effect of temperature on biomass allocation in tomato
     (Lycopersicon esculentum). Physiologia Plantarum 94, 447–452.
Heuvelink, E. (1995b) Effect of plant density on biomass allocation to the fruits in to-
     mato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.). Scientia Horticulturae 64, 193–201. doi:
     10.1016/0304-4238(95)00839-X.
Heuvelink, E. (1999) Evaluation of a dynamic simulation model for tomato crop growth
     and development. Annals of Botany 83, 413–422.
Heuvelink, E. and Bakker, M.J. (2003) A photosynthesis-driven tomato model: two case
     studies. In: Hu, B.G. and Jaeger, M. (eds) Plant Growth Modeling and Applications.
     Tsinghua University Press and Springer, Beijing, pp. 229–235.
Heuvelink, E. and Buiskool, R.P.M. (1995) Influence of sink-source interaction on dry
     matter production in tomato. Annals of Botany 75, 381–389.
Heuvelink, E., Bakker, M.J. and Stanghellini, C. (2003) Salinity effects on fruit yield
     in vegetable crops: a simulation study. Acta Horticulturae 609, 133–140. doi:
     10.17660/ActaHortic.2003.609.17.
Heuvelink, E., Bakker, M.J., Elings, A., Kaarsemaker, R. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2005)
     Effect of leaf area on tomato yield. Acta Horticulturae 691, 43–50. doi: 10.17660/
     ActaHortic.2005.691.2.
Heuvelink, E., Bakker, M.J., Marcelis, L.F.M. and Raaphorst, M. (2008) Climate and
     yield in a closed greenhouse. Acta Horticulturae 801, 1083–1092. doi: 10.17660/
     ActaHortic.2008.801.130.
Hewitt, J.D. and Marrush, M. (1986) Remobilization of nonstructural carbohydrates
     from vegetative tissues to fruits in tomato. Journal of the American Society of
     Horticulture Science 111, 142–145.
Higashide, T. and Heuvelink, E. (2009) Physiological and morphological changes over
     the past 50 years in yield components in tomato. Journal of the American Society for
     Horticultural Science 134, 460–465.
Higashide, T., Yasuba, K., Suzuki, K., Nakano, A. and Ohmori, H. (2012) Yield of
     Japanese tomato cultivars has been hampered by a breeding focus on flavor.
     HortScience 47, 1408–1411.
Hlavinka, J., Naus, J. and Fellner, M. (2013) Spontaneous mutation 7B-1 in tomato im-
     pairs blue light-induced stomatal opening. Plant Science 209, 75–80.
Ho, L.C. (1996) Tomato. In: Zamski, E. and Schaffer, A.A. (eds) Photoassimilate
     Distribution in Plants and Crops: Source-Sink Relationships. Marcel Dekker Inc., New
     York, pp. 709–728.
Hoffman, G.J. (1979) Humidity. In: Tibbits, T.W. and Kozlowski, T.T. (eds)
     Controlled Environment Guidelines for Plant Research. Academic Press, London,
     pp. 141–172.
Holder, R. and Cockshull, K.E. (1988) The effect of humidity and nutrition on the devel-
     opment of calcium deficiency symptoms in tomato leaves. In: Cockshull, K.E. (ed.)
                                   Crop Growth and Yield                                 131


     The Effects of High Humidity on Plant Growth in Energy Saving Greenhouses. Office
     for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, pp. 53–60.
Hunt, R. (1982) Plant Growth Curves: The Functional Approach to Plant Growth Analysis.
     Edward Arnold, London.
Jan, N.E. and Kawabata, S. (2011) Relationship between fruit soluble solid content
     and the sucrose concentration of the phloem sap at different leaf to fruit ratios in
     tomato. Journal of the Japanese Society for Horticultural Science 80, 314–321. doi:
     10.2503/jjshs1.80.314.
Jones, T.L., Tucker, D.E. and Ort, D.R. (1998) Chilling delays circadian pattern of sucrose
     phosphate synthase and nitrate reductase activity in tomato. Plant Physiology 118,
     149–158.
Kaiser, E. (2016) Environmental and physiological control of dynamic photosynthesis.
     PhD thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands. Available at:
     http://edepot.wur.nl/370233 (accessed 19 January 2018).
Kang, M.Z., Yang, L.L., Zhang, B.G. and De Reffye, P. (2011) Correlation between dy-
     namic tomato fruit-set and source–sink ratio: a common relationship for different
     plant densities and seasons? Annals of Botany 107, 805–815. doi:10.1093/aob/
     mcq244.
Kasperbauer, M.J. and Kaul, K. (1996) Light quantity and quality effects on source-
     sink relationships during plant growth and development. In: Zamski, E. and
     Schaffer, A.A. (eds) Photoassimilate Distribution in Plants and Crops: Source-Sink
     Relationships. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York, pp. 421–440.
Katerji, N., Campi, P. and Mastrorilli, M. (2013) Productivity, evapotranspiration, and
     water use efficiency of corn and tomato crops simulated by AquaCrop under con-
     trasting water stress conditions in the Mediterranean region. Agricultural Water
     Management 130, 14–26.
Khan, A. and Sagar, G.R. (1969) Alteration of the pattern of distribution of photosynthetic
     products in the tomato by manipulation of the plant. Annals of Botany 33, 753–762.
Khan, I., Azam, A. and Mahmood, A. (2013) The impact of enhanced atmospheric
     carbon dioxide on yield, proximate composition, elemental concentration, fatty
     acid and vitamin C contents of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum). Environmental
     Monitoring and Assessment 185, 205–214. doi: 10.1007/s10661-012-2544-x.
Kissoudis, C., Seifi, A., Yan, Z., Islam, A.T.M.T., van der Schoot, H. et al. (2017) Ethylene
     and abscisic acid signaling pathways differentially influence tomato resistance to
     combined powdery mildew and salt stress. Frontiers in Plant Science 7, 2009. doi:
     10.3389/fpls.2016.02009.
Kleinhenz, V., Katroschan, K., Schütt, F. and Stützel, H. (2006) Biomass accumula-
     tion and partitioning of tomato under protected cultivation in the humid tropics.
     European Journal of Horticultural Science 71, 173–182.
Körner, O., Heuvelink, E. and Niu, Q. (2009) Quantification of temperature, CO2, and
     light effects on crop photosynthesis as a basis for model-based greenhouse cli-
     mate control. Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology 84, 233–239. doi:
     10.1080/14620316.2009.11512510.
Kotiranta, S., Siipola, S., Robson, T.M., Aphalo, P.J. and Kotilainen, T. (2015) LED lights
     can be used to improve the water deficit tolerance of tomato seedlings grown in
     greenhouses. Acta Horticulturae 1107, 107–113.
Leakey, A.D.B., Ainsworth, E.A., Bernacchi, C.J., Rogers, A., Long, S.P. and Ort, D.R.
     (2009) Elevated CO2 effects on plant carbon, nitrogen, and water relations: six
132                                 E. Heuvelink et al.


       ­important lessons from FACE. Journal of Experimental Botany 60, 2859–2876. doi:
        10.1093/jxb/erp096.
Li, J., Zhou, J.-M., Duan, Z.-Q., Du, C.-W. and Wang, H.-Y. (2007) Effect of CO2 enrichment
       on the growth and nutrient uptake of tomato seedlings. Pedosphere 17, 343–351.
       doi: 10.1016/s1002-0160(07)60041-1.
Li, T., Heuvelink, E. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2015) Quantifying the source-sink balance
       and carbohydrate content in three tomato cultivars. Frontiers in Plant Science 6,
       416. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00416.
Li, T., Heuvelink, E., Dueck, T.A., Janse, J., Gort, G. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2014)
       Enhancement of crop photosynthesis by diffuse light: quantifying the contributing
       factors. Annals of Botany 114, 145–156.
Li, Y.L. and Stanghellini, C. (2001) Analysis of the effect of EC and potential transpir-
       ation on vegetative growth of tomato. Scientia Horticulturae 89, 9–21.
Liu, Y.F., Qia, M.F. and Li, T.L. (2012) Photosynthesis, photoinhibition, and antioxidant
       system in tomato leaves stressed by low night temperature and their subsequent
       recovery. Plant Science 196, 8–17. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.07.005.
Lovelli, S., Scopa, A., Perniola, M., Di Tommaso, T. and Sofo, A. (2012) Abscisic
       acid root and leaf concentration in relation to biomass partitioning in salin-
       ized tomato plants. Journal of Plant Physiology 169, 226–233. doi: 10.1016/j.
       jplph.2011.09.009.
Lu, N. and Mitchell, C.A. (2016) Supplementary lighting for greenhouse-grown
       fruit vegetables. In: Kozai, T., Fujiwara, K. and Runkle, E.S. (eds) LED Lighting
       for Urban Agriculture. Springer, Singapore, pp. 219–232. doi: 10.1007/978-981-
       10-1848-0.
Luengwilai, K. and Beckles, D.M. (2009) Starch granules in tomato fruit show a com-
       plex pattern of degradation. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 57, 8480–
       8487. doi: 10.1021/jf901593m.
Luengwilai, K., Fiehn, O.E. and Beckles, D.M. (2010) Comparison of leaf and fruit me-
       tabolism in two tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) genotypes varying in total soluble
       solids. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 58, 11790–11800. doi: 10.1021/
       jf102562n.
Lytovchenko, A., Eickmeier, I., Pons, C., Osorio, S., Szecowka, M. et al. (2011) Tomato
       fruit photosynthesis is seemingly unimportant in primary metabolism and
       ripening but plays a considerable role in seed development. Plant Physiology 157,
       1650–1663. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.186874.
Maggio, A., Dalton, F.N. and Piccinni, G. (2002) The effects of elevated carbon di-
       oxide on static and dynamic indices for tomato salt tolerance. European Journal of
       Agronomy 16, 197–206. doi: 10.1016/s1161-0301(01)00128-9.
Mamatha, H., Srinivasa Rao, N.K., Laxman, R.H., Shivashankara, K.S., Bhatt, R.M. and
       Pavithra, K.C. (2014) Impact of elevated CO2 on growth, physiology, yield, and
        quality of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill) cv. Arka Ashish. Photosynthetica
        52, 519–528. doi: 10.1007/s11099-014-0059-0.
Marcelis, L.F.M., Heuvelink, E. and Goudriaan, J. (1998) Modelling biomass pro-
        duction and yield of horticultural crops: a review. Scientia Horticulturae 74,
        83–111.
Marcelis, L.F.M., Broekhuijsen, A.G.M., Meinen, E., Nijs, E.M.F.M. and Raaphorst,
        M.G.M. (2006) Quantification of the growth response to light quantity of green-
        house grown crops. Acta Horticulturae 711, 97–103.
                                  Crop Growth and Yield                                 133


Marcelis, L.F.M., Elings, A., de Visser, P.H.B. and Heuvelink, E. (2009) Simulating
     growth and development of tomato crop. Acta Horticulturae 821, 101–110.
Matsuda, R., Suzuki, K., Nakano, A., Higashide, T. and Takaichi, M. (2011) Responses
     of leaf photosynthesis and plant growth to altered source–sink balance in a
     Japanese and a Dutch tomato cultivar. Scientia Horticulturae 127, 520–527. doi:
     org/10.1016/j.scienta.2010.12.008.
McCree, K.J. (1972) Action spectrum, absorptance and quantum yield of photosyn-
     thesis in crop plants. Agricultural Meteorology 9, 191–216.
Mercado, L.M., Bellouin, N., Sitch, S., Boucher, O., Huntingford, C., Wild, M. and Cox, P.M.
     (2009) Impact of changes in diffuse radiation on the global land carbon sink.
     Nature 458, 1014–1017.
Moerkens, R., Vanlommel, W., Vanderbruggen, R. and Van Delm, T. (2016) The added
     value of LED assimilation light in combination with high pressure sodium lamps in
     protected tomato crops in Belgium. Acta Horticulturae 1134, 119–124.
Morrow, R.C. (2008) LED lighting in horticulture. HortScience 43, 1947–1950.
Nagel, O.W., Konings, H. and Lambers, H. (2001) Growth rate and biomass parti-
     tioning of wildtype and low-gibberellin tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) plants
     growing at a high and low nitrogen supply. Physiologia Plantarum 111, 33–39. doi:
     10.1034/j.1399-3054.2001.1110105.x.
Najla, S., Vercambre, G., Pagès, L., Grasselly, D., Gautier, H. and Génard, M. (2009)
     Tomato plant architecture as affected by salinity: descriptive analysis and integra-
     tion in a 3-D simulation model. Botany 87, 893–904. doi: 10.1139/B09-061.
Nebauer, S.G., Sánchez, M., Martínez, L., Lluch, Y., Renau-Morata, B. and Molina R.V.
     (2013) Differences in photosynthetic performance and its correlation with growth
     among tomato cultivars in response to different salts. Plant Physiology and
     Biochemistry 63, 61–69. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2012.11.006.
Nederhoff, E.M. (1994) Effects of CO2 concentration on photosynthesis, transpiration
     and production of greenhouse fruit vegetable crops. Dissertation, Wageningen
     Agricultural University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Nelson, J.A. and Bugbee, B. (2014) Economic analysis of greenhouse lighting: light
     emitting diodes vs. high intensity discharge fixtures. PLoS ONE 9(6), e99010. doi:
     10.1371/journal.pone.0099010.
Novitskaya, G.V. and Trunova, T.I.D. (2000) Relationship between cold resistance of plants
     and the lipid content of their chloroplast membranes. Biochemistry 371, 50–52.
Ntatsi, G., Savvas, D., Druege, U. and Schwarz, D. (2013) Contribution of phytohor-
     mones in alleviating the impact of sub-optimal temperature stress on grafted to-
     mato. Scientia Horticulturae 149, 28–38.
Ogweno, J.O., Song, X.S., Shi, K., Hu, W.H., Mao, W.H. et al. (2008) Brassinosteroids
     alleviate heat-induced inhibition of photosynthesis by increasing carboxylation ef-
     ficiency and enhancing antioxidant systems in Lycopersicon esculentum. Journal of
     Plant Growth Regulation 27, 49–57. doi: 10.1007/s00344-007-9030-7.
Okello, R.C., Heuvelink, E., de Visser, P.H.B., Lammers, M., de Maagd, R.A.,
     Marcelis, L.F.M. and Struik, P.C. (2015) Fruit illumination stimulates cell div-
     ision but has no detectable effect on fruit size in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum).
     Physiologia Plantarum 154(1), 114–127.
Panthee, D.R. and Gardner, R.G. (2011) Genetic improvement of fresh market tomatoes
     for yield and fruit quality over 35 years in North Carolina. International Journal of
     Vegetable Science 17, 259–273. doi: 10.1080/19315260.2010.545867.
134                                   E. Heuvelink et al.


Pérez-Alfocea, F., Albacete, A., Ghanem, M.E. and Dodd, I.C. (2010 ) Hormonal regu-
     lation of source-sink relations to maintain crop productivity under salinity: a case
     study of root-to-shoot signalling in tomato. Functional Plant Biology 37, 592–603.
Persoon, S. and Hogewoning, S.W. (2014) Onderzoek naar de fundamenten van energiebe-
     sparing in de belichte teelt. Productschap Tuinbouw, consultancy report. Available
     at: https://www.tuinbouwnl.nl/content/Onderzoeken/14764.04_Fundamenten_
     energiebesparing_belichte_teelt.pdf (accessed 18 May 2018).
Picken, A.J.F. (1984) A review of pollination and fruit set in the tomato (Lycopersicon
     esculentum Mill.). Journal of Horticultural Science 59, 1–13.
Poorter, H. and Garnier, E. (1996) Plant growth analysis: an evaluation of experimental
     design and computational methods. Journal of Experimental Botany 47(302),
     1343–1351. [Erratum: Dec 1996, v. 47 (305), p. 1969.]
Prudent, M., Bertin, N., Génard, M., Muños, S., Rolland, S. et al. (2010) Genotype-
     dependent response to carbon availability in growing tomato fruit. Plant, Cell and
     Environment 33, 1186–1204. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2010.02139.x.
Qi, H., Hua, L., Zhao, L. and Zhou, L. (2011) Carbohydrate metabolism in tomato
     (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) seedlings and yield and fruit quality as affected by
     low night temperature and subsequent recovery. African Journal of Biotechnology
     10, 5743–5749. doi: 10.5897/AJB10.1475.
Qian, T., Dieleman, J.A., Elings, A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2012) Leaf photosynthetic and
     morphological responses to elevated CO2 concentration and altered fruit number
     in the semi-closed greenhouse. Scientia Horticulturae 145, 1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.
     scienta.2012.07.015.
Romero-Aranda, R., Soria, T. and Cuartero, J. (2001) Tomato plant-water uptake and
     plant-water relationships under saline growth conditions. Plant Science 160, 265–
     272. doi: 10.1016/s0168-9452(00)00388-5.
Saito, T., Fukuda, N., Matsukura, C. and Nishimura, S. (2009) Effects of salinity on dis-
     tribution of photosynthates and carbohydrate metabolism in tomato grown using
     nutrient film technique. Journal of the Japanese Society for Horticultural Science 78,
     90–96. 2009. doi: 10.2503/jjshs1.78.90.
Sarlikioti, V. (2011) Modelling and remote sensing of canopy light interception and
     plant stress in greenhouses. PhD thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
     Netherlands. Available at: http://edepot.wur.nl/183133 (accessed 19 January 2018).
Scholberg, J., McNeal, B.L., Jones, J.W., Boote, K.J., Stanley, C.D. and Obreza, T.A. (2000)
     Field-grown tomato – growth and canopy characteristics of field-grown tomato.
     Agronomy Journal 92, 152–159.
Schwarz, D., Rouphael, Y., Colla, G. and Venema, J.H. (2010) Grafting as a tool to improve
     tolerance of vegetables to abiotic stresses: thermal stress, water stress and organic pol-
     lutants. Scientia Horticulturae 127, 162–171. doi: 10.1016/j.scienta.2010.09.016.
Schwarz, D., Thompson, A.J. and Kläring, H.-P. (2014) Guidelines to use tomato in ex-
     periments with a controlled environment. Frontiers in Plant Science 5, 625. doi:
     10.3389/fpls.2014.00625.
Shi, K., Fu, L.-J., Zhang, S., Li, X., Liao, Y.-W.-K. et al. (2013) Flexible change and co-
     operation between mitochondrial electron transport and cytosolic glycolysis as the
     basis for chilling tolerance in tomato plants. Planta 237, 589–601. doi: 10.1007/
     s00425-012-1799-3.
Slack, G. and Calvert, A. (1977) The effect of truss removal on the yield of early sown
     tomatoes. Journal of Horticultural Science 52, 309–315.
                                  Crop Growth and Yield                                 135


Somerville, C. (1995) Direct tests of the role of membrane lipid composition in low-tem-
     perature-induced photoinhibition and chilling sensitivity in plants and cyanobac-
     teria. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 92, 6215–6218.
Stanghellini, C., Van Meurs, W.Th.M., Corver, F., Van Dullemen, E. and Simonse, L. (1998)
     Combined effect of climate and concentration of the nutrient solution on a green-
     house tomato crop. II. Yield quantity and quality. Acta Horticulturae 458, 231–237.
Takagi, M., El-Shemy, H.A., Sasaki, S., Toyama, S., Kanai, S., Saneoka, H. and Fujita, K.
     (2009) Elevated CO2 concentration alleviates salinity stress in tomato plant.
     Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica Section B: Soil and Plant Science 59, 87–96. doi:
     10.1080/09064710801932425.
Tanaka, A., Fujita, K. and Kikuchi, K. (1974) Nutrio-physiological studies on the to-
     mato plant. III. Photosynthetic rate of individual leaves in relation to the dry
     matter production of plants. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 20, 173–183. doi:
     10.1080/00380768.1974.10433240.
Trouwborst, G., Hogewoning, S.W., Harbinson, J. and Van Ieperen, W. (2011) The influ-
     ence of light intensity and leaf age on the photosynthetic capacity of leaves within
     a tomato canopy. Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology 86, 403–407.
     doi: 10.1080/14620316.2011.11512781.
Valerio, M., Tomecek, M., Lovelli, S. and Ziska, L. (2013) Assessing the impact of in-
     creasing carbon dioxide and temperature on crop-weed interactions for tomato
     and a C3 and C4 weed species. European Journal of Agronomy 50, 60–65. doi:
     10.1016/j.eja.2013.05.006.
Van de Dijk, S.J. and Maris, J.A. (1985) Differences between tomato genotypes in net
     photosynthesis and dark respiration under low light intensity and low night tem-
     peratures. Euphytica 34, 709–716. doi: 10.1007/bf00035408.
Vélez-Ramírez, A.I. (2014) Continuous light on tomato: from gene to yield. PhD thesis,
     Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands. Available at: http://
     edepot.wur.nl/312846 (accessed 18 May 2018).
Venema, J.H., Posthumus, F. and Van Hasselt, P.R. (1999a) Impact of suboptimal
     temperature on growth, photosynthesis, leaf pigments and carbohydrates of
     domestic and high-altitude wild Lycopersicon species. Journal of Plant Physiology
     155, 711–718.
Venema, J.H., Posthumus, F., De Vries, M. and Van Hasselt, P.R. (1999b) Differential
     response of domestic and wild Lycopersicon species to chilling under low light:
     growth, carbohydrate content, photosynthesis and the xanthophyll cycle.
     Physiologia Plantarum 105, 81–88. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-3054.1999.105113.x.
Venema, J.H, Linger, P., Van Heusden, A.W., Van Hasselt, P.R. and Brüggemann, W.
     (2005) The inheritance of chilling tolerance in tomato (Lycopersicon spp.). Plant
     Biology 7, 118–130. doi: 1055/s-2005-837495.
Verheul, M.J., Maessen, H.F.R. and Grimstad, S.O. (2012) Optimizing a year-round cul-
     tivation system of tomato under artificial light. Acta Horticulturae 956, 389–394.
     doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2012.956.45.
Wahid, A., Gelani, S., Ashraf, M. and Foola, M.R. (2007) Heat tolerance in plants: an
     overview. Environmental and Experimental Botany 61, 199–223. doi: 10.1016/j.
     envexpbot.2007.05.011.
Wang, Y., Du, S.T., Li, L.L., Huang, L.D., Fang, P. et al. (2009) Effect of CO2 elevation on
     root growth and its relationship with indole acetic acid and ethylene in tomato
     seedlings. Pedosphere 19, 570–576. doi: 10.1016/s1002-0160(09)60151-x.
136                                 E. Heuvelink et al.


Wang, J., Gao, S., Yuan, J. and Ma, F. (2012) Simulation of dry matter accumulation,
    partitioning and yield prediction in processing tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum
    Mill.). Australian Journal of Crop Science 6, 93–100. Available at: http://www.cropj.
    com/wang_6_1_2012_93_100.pdf (accessed 19 January 2017).
Xiao, S.G., Van der Ploeg, A., Bakker, M. and Heuvelink, E. (2004) Two instead of three
    leaves between tomato trusses: measured and simulated effects on partitioning and
    yield. Acta Horticulturae 654, 303–308. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2004.654.35.
Xu, H.L., Gauthier, L., Desjardins, Y. and Gosselin, A. (1997) Photosynthesis in leaves,
    stem and petioles of greenhouse-grown tomato plants. Photosynthetica 33, 113–123.
    doi: 10.1023/A:1022135507700.
Zhang, J., Jiang, X., Li, T. and Chang, T. (2012) Effect of elevated temperature stress on
    the production and metabolism of photosynthate in tomato (Lycopersicon esculen-
    tum L.) leaves. Journal of Horticultural Science & Biotechnology 87, 293–298. doi:
    10.1080/14620316.2012.11512867.
