                                     6
               Irrigation and Fertilization
           Bielinski M. Santos and Emmanuel A. Torres-Quezada




INTRODUCTION

This chapter deals with the basic principles of water and fertilizer management
in tomato, as well as discussing the practical application of these topics in both
open field and greenhouse production of the crop, with recommendations for
soil and soilless conditions. Where applicable, a clear distinction between these
two production environments is made on the particular aspects of irrigation
and plant nutrition. However, there is a great degree of overlapping informa-
tion that is equally pertinent to greenhouse and field production. Decisions
on the use of certain irrigation and fertilization practices will depend on the
specific growing conditions (e.g. soil, soilless, tomato types and cultivars, cul-
tural practices) of each grower, as described elsewhere in this book. The basic
principles on irrigation and fertilization cover the influence of water quality,
irrigation requirements, plant nutrition and fertigation on tomato growth and
yield. Sonneveld and Voogt (2009) provided specific information on water and
fertilizer management in greenhouse crops (see also Chapter 9). Fertilization in
organic tomato production is discussed in Chapter 11.


WATER QUALITY AND IRRIGATION REQUIREMENTS

Salinity and pH

High-quality irrigation water is a prerequisite for any production system.
Salinity level and water pH are two of the main parameters used by growers
for crop management. Salinity is expressed by the electrical conductivity (EC)
of a solution, in units of mS/cm (millisiemens per centimetre) or dS/m (decisie-
mens per metre). These units represent a quantitative measure of the ability
of a material to allow the movement of an electric charge (conductance).
Measurements of EC are related to the total concentration of electrolytes in
solution (dissolved salts form ionic particles, each with positive or negative

180                      © CAB International 2018. Tomatoes 2nd edition (E. Heuvelink)
                             Irrigation and Fertilization                          181


charge). Hence, diluted salts contribute greatly to solution conductance. Soil
EC can also be correlated with soil texture, cation exchange capacity and soil
moisture (Grisso et al., 2009). Irrigation water EC is generally used as an indi-
cator of total fertilizer concentration.
      EC measurements are one of the simplest, fastest and least expensive tests
available for growers. The test allows growers to have an indicator of the total
concentration of ions in solution but it does not discriminate among ions in
solution or their concentrations. This is especially important in soilless cul-
ture, given the low buffer capacity of most soilless media. Adequate EC levels
in t­omato production are generally managed between 1.6 and 5.0 dS/m,
­depending on the cultivar, environmental conditions and production prac-
 tices (Dorais et al., 2001). Too high EC in the rhizosphere can negatively affect
 stomata conductance and leaf areas and therefore plant photosynthetic rate,
 water and nutrient uptake, dry matter accumulation, and fruit development
 and quality (see Chapter 4).
      High salt concentrations in solution outside the root tissue create an equal
 or higher osmotic potential than inside the plant tissue. Under this condition,
 water will move out of the plant tissue by osmosis, causing stress by dehydra-
 tion and eventual wilting (Fig. 6.1). Stomatal conductance decreases (about




                                                    Fig. 6.1. Tomato plant subjected
                                                    to heat and salinity stress. Leaves
                                                    also show symptoms of calcium
                                                    deficiency.
182                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


  30%) but stomata are not completely shut down, leading to desiccation and
  loss of turgor of the cells (Wu and Kubota, 2008). Salinity in solution tends to
  increase as water is depleted by transpiration. Furthermore, depending on the
  concentration of ions in solution, plants can be affected by nutritional imbal-
  ance generally associated with sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl–) uptake, com-
 petitive uptake, and disorders in transport and partitioning of solutes within
 the plant.
       Nitrogen (N-NO3–) uptake decreases under high EC concentrations, pos-
 sibly due to an interaction between nitrate (NO3–) and Cl– at the ion transport
  sites. Furthermore, membrane depolarization has been related to high Na+
  concentrations (Dorais et al., 2001). Under high EC, water and nutrient up-
  take decreases, including NO3–, which regulates nitrate reductase transcription,
translation and activation in higher plants, thus reducing its activity. Debouba
et al. (2007) and Martinez and Cerda (1989) showed that nitrate reductase
­activity in tomato plants decreased by 40% when grown with 100 mM of NaCl
 in solution.
       The effect of high salinity depends on the specific nutrient under con-
 sideration. A high NaCl concentration will reduce tomato yield regardless of
 phosphorus (P) concentrations in the soil solution. However, high P concentra-
 tions can enhance manganese (Mn) uptake and/or reduce zinc (Zn) utilization.
 Tomato plants grown with 3 dS/m of NaCl did not suffer reduced potassium
 (K+) uptake. However, under 5 and 8 dS/m of NaCl, K+ uptake was reduced by
 27% and 36% (Adams and Ho, 1995). Calcium (Ca2+) can also be displaced by
  high Na+ concentration around cell membranes, triggering additional physio-
 logical disorders.
       Hot, dry conditions coupled with high salinity could cause rapid wilting
 and permanent damage. However, the outcomes of high EC in tomato produc-
 tion change based on the part of the plant under examination, environmental
 conditions, cultivar, ions in solution and time of day. For example, tomato
 grown at 17 dS/m (high EC) compared with 2 dS/m (low EC) resulted in a
 ­reduction of fruit growth rate during daytime, with no effect on growth rate
  at night (Ehret and Ho, 1986). Meanwhile, the effects of high salinity on fruit
  yield are extensively reported to be detrimental. Total yield reduction under
  high EC levels are associated with decreased fruit size and number, and devel-
  opment of blossom-end rot, a physiological disorder related to low Ca concen-
  tration, inadequate water supply and gene expression under stress conditions
  (see Chapter 5) (Van Ieperen, 1996).
       On the other hand, high EC levels can improve organoleptic and nutra-
  ceutical features of tomato fruit and help with plant conditioning (see Chapter 5)
  (Adams, 1991; Mitchell et al., 1991). Under high EC conditions, starch accu-
  mulation and sucrose synthase enzyme activity are built-up in fruit, which
  generally results in improved fruit quality (Dorais et al., 2001). Furthermore,
  controlled high EC condition might positively affect tomato production systems.
  During the early stages of plant establishment, high EC may strengthen cell
                                Irrigation and Fertilization                      183


 walls in plants. The same study reported that fruit cuticle thickness ­increased,
 while turgor pressure and firmness decreased, making the fruit less susceptible
 to cracking and allowing for a longer shelf-life (Dorais et al., 2001). High EC
 concentration has also been associated with better colour indexes and reduc-
 tion of uneven ripening. It is important to note that this would vary according
 to cultivars.
      Tomato crops could be grown in nutrient solutions containing 100 ppm
 Cl– without too much difficulty, but it is recommended to use water sources
 with < 50 ppm Na+ and < 70 ppm Cl– (OMAFRA, 2001). Adjusting the EC
 normally allows modification of plant water availability and maintenance of
 a healthy balance between vegetative and reproductive parts of plants (Holder
 and Christensen, 1989). Low-quality water with relatively high concentra-
 tions of salts, such as those containing dissolved Na+, Cl– and sulfate (SO42–),
 should be utilized with caution in substrate and soil culture systems, as long
 as root zones can be leached and salts removed as water moves down. It is a
 common practice in many hydroponic systems without water recirculation to
 flush media using frequent irrigations to prevent salt accumulation. However,
 environmental protection measures push towards recirculation of the nutrient
 solution, which puts much higher demands on the irrigation water and the
 purity of the used fertilizers (e.g. Beerling et al., 2014).
      Acceptable EC levels for irrigation water range between 0.75 dS/m in the
 early crop stages and 1.5 dS/m during harvest. Detailed water quality stand-
 ards for greenhouse production are presented in Table 6.1. Regardless of the
 production system, irrigation water should be tested at least twice a year, or
 every time a new source of water (e.g. well, river, pond or municipal system) is
 selected for crop production. Additionally, it is important to acknowledge that
 other salinity sources could also be present in everyday operations, such as nu-
 trient ions dissolved in surface waters. Nutrients that have leached or drained
 from adjacent farms or landscapes could lead to high amounts of nitrates (NO3–),
 sulfates (SO42–) and phosphates (PO43–) in surface waters.
      For soilless-grown greenhouse crops, the concentration of fertilizers is
an important factor in the irrigation. When radiation and air temperature
­increase, the water uptake rate increases at a higher rate than nutrient ­uptake.
 Thus, the concentration of the remaining nutrient solution in the root zone
 and salinity rise. If this effect is not controlled, both water and nutrient ­uptake


Table 6.1. Minimum standards for greenhouse crop irrigation water (OMAFRA, 2001).

Water class        ECa (dS/m)    Sodium (ppm)           Chloride (ppm)   Sulfate (ppm)

1                     < 0.5            < 30                      < 50       < 100
2                    0.5–1.0          30–60                     50–100     100–200
3                    1.0–1.5          60–90                    100–150     200–300
a
 Electrical conductivity.
184                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


may be reduced, resulting in wilting and slower growth. Generally, this ten-
dency is overcome by adjusting the EC of the supplied nutrient solution in
­accordance with the climate.
      The pH of the irrigation water is not so much of a problem in soil-grown
 crops but it is crucial in soilless cultivation. A high pH is a risk for micronu-
 trient availability and can cause precipitation and clogging of irrigation sys-
 tems. The most common pH range for irrigation water is from 6.5 to 8.4. A pH
 outside the adequate range may cause low availability of certain nutrients or
 allow for dilution of toxic ions derived from the soil. Low salt content in irri-
 gation water (EC < 0.2 dS/m) may also lead to a pH outside the normal range,
 due to the low buffering capacity of the solution. One of the major problems of
 abnormal water pH is the effect on the irrigation equipment. High pH in water
 may be corrosive for pipelines, sprinklers and control equipment.
      Soil buffering capacity will allow for slow changes in medium solution pH.
 Trying to change initial pH of the water source is impractical, because any
 introduction of an amendment will only achieve results in a few instances.
 However, the nutrient solution pH, used for fertilization, could be adjusted as
 long as this is done on a regular basis. In the case of production in soils, a most
 effective approach is to try to adjust the soil pH through practices such as
 liming or addition of elemental sulfur (S).


Environmental conditions affecting irrigation

A basic principle of irrigation is that the total amount of applied water during
irrigation should be equal to the crop requirement plus the volume lost
through diverse processes, such as evaporation and leaching. The irrigation
requirement is a function of crop type, growing stage and evaporation (Dukes
et al., 2012). The volume of water lost through evaporation from the soil and
plant surfaces and through transpiration from leaves is termed evapotranspir-
ation (ET). Evaporation is the process by which water is converted from liquid
to ­vapour, while transpiration causes water loss through the leaf stomata. ET
is affected by environmental conditions including solar radiation, air tempera-
ture and relative humidity, as well as wind speed.
      As water evaporates from soil or a wet surface, energy transfer occurs.
During evaporation, water absorbs approximately 540 calories/g from the sur-
rounding air in a process called evaporative cooling (Albregts and Howard,
1985). Eventually, the overlying air becomes saturated with water until air
temperature decreases below the dew point (temperature where air is saturated
with water) and condensation begins. When both processes – evaporation and
condensation – are equal, the relative humidity (RH) of the air will be 100%.
High temperatures, wind and solar radiation tend to increase evaporation,
while high RH has the opposite effect. Humidity can be expressed as abso-
lute humidity (g/m3), vapour pressure (kPa), specific humidity (g water/kg air)
                             Irrigation and Fertilization                     185


or RH (ratio between the mass of water vapour in the air and the maximum
mass it can hold at that temperature, i.e. saturation). The amount of water
vapour that a given volume of air can hold is dependent on temperature,
almost doubling for every 10°C rise in temperature. Transpiration rate in-
creases as the difference between the fully saturated atmosphere inside the
leaf (100% RH) and the water vapour content outside the leaf increases.
Mathematically, this difference is described as vapour deficit or vapour pressure
deficit (VPD). Since water vapour exerts pressure, VPD is expressed in units of
pressure, such as millibars (mbar) or kPa. The transpiration rate also depends
on the stage of growth, as well as the soil water status. Transpiration is reduced
when VPD is too low and leaves may appear thicker and larger. Stems are also
thick but root systems may appear weak and plants are more susceptible to dis-
ease (OMAFRA, 2001).
     A greenhouse irrigation system should be able to provide at least 8 l/m2
per day (80,000 l/ha per day). A mature tomato plant may use between 2 and
3 l/day (OMAFRA, 2003). Most of this water (90%) is used for transpiration
and the rest for growth. Water use efficiency is much higher in greenhouses
than in field production. To produce 1 kg of fresh tomatoes, between 15 l and
60 l of irrigation water are required, depending on growing conditions and
crop management (Stanghellini et al., 2003). In a survey of water productivity
of growing systems for tomato production in Spain, it was demonstrated that
productivity of greenhouse growing was about four times higher than in the
field. For a given growing system (either field or greenhouse), the level of ‘man-
agement’ of the farm could make a difference of two-and-a-half times again.
In short, an ‘excellent’ greenhouse grower is able to produce ten times more to-
matoes with 1 m3 of water than an ‘average’ field grower (Stanghellini, 2014).


Irrigation scheduling

Soil and soilless production: irrigation based on evapotranspiration
The reference ET (ETo) is defined as the ET rate from an extended surface
covered with green grass or alfalfa 8–15 cm tall, actively growing and com-
pletely covering the ground without limiting water supply (Doorenbos and
Pruitt, 1977). There are several methods to assess reference values for spe-
cific production regions, including the Penman-Monteith, the Thornthwaite,
the Hargreaves and the Hamon methods. In open field situations, the former
is often considered the standard for estimation of water requirements for crops
and it is expressed as water volume per surface area over time. The water use
of the crop is obtained by multiplying the crop coefficients (Kc), which are ob-
tained from crop water use during different growth stages, and the ETo. For
mature tomato, the Kc during mid-season is between 0.75 and 0.90. This
method is widely used for scheduling irrigation programmes for field-grown
crops, including tomato.
186                          B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


Soil and soilless production: irrigation based on solar radiation
Solar radiation is the main factor in calculating crop irrigation requirements.
Within a day, transpiration closely follows radiation (Fig. 6.2). When radiation
is higher, leaf temperatures increase, which in turn increases VPD and tran-
spiration. Because of this close relationship between incoming solar radiation
and water loss through transpiration, computerized irrigation in commercial
greenhouses is frequently based on received solar radiation. Net radiation is
generally equal to maximum ET, except for unusually hot and windy days,
when ET can be 30% higher than net radiation (Tanner et al., 1960).
     In modern, well controlled greenhouses, the adjustments to seasonal and
even day-to-day fluctuations of radiation and temperature are part of the
standard irrigation strategies. However, these adjustments will also take into
account crop stage, as well as the overall strategy of EC control with regard to
crop development and fruit quality management. At low humidity (high VPD),
transpiration may be excessive, stressing the plant. Indications of excessive
transpiration in greenhouse tomatoes include small thin leaves and stems but
a strong root system (OMAFRA, 2001).

       25                                                                           1000




       20                                                                           800




       15                                                                           600




       10                                                                           400




        5                                                                           200




        0                                                                           0
        5:30               11:30               17:30           23:30             5:30
      14-03-’92                                                                15-03-’92
                                              Time (h)

                  Transpiration rate (mg/s)       Global radiation outside (W/m2)

Fig. 6.2. Transpiration during daytime strongly correlates with solar radiation
(greenhouse tomato crop in The Netherlands). (Reprinted, with permission, from
Journal of Experimental Botany 45, 56, Van Ieperen and Madery, 1994.)
                              Irrigation and Fertilization                      187


      Inside greenhouses, VPD cannot be completely controlled. However, rais-
ing temperatures, venting and/or air movement will generally increase VPD,
whereas misting (fogging) will generally decrease VPD. The frequency of
watering is also a tool in crop management. With frequent irrigation, plants
­experience less stress because water status is more constant. In managing plant
 growth in soilless growing systems, stress resulting from either periodic water
 deficits or high salinity levels results in reduction of plant biomass, chlorophyll
 content and total yield with increased electrolyte leakage (Kirnak et al., 2001).

Soilless production: irrigation based on drainage
Irrigation management in soilless media may be based on the amount of water
draining out (also referred to as over-drainage or percentage leach). Irrigation
will stop when a pre-established drainage percentage is collected from a col-
lective sample of the greenhouse. More specifically, the nature of this strategy
is based on the necessity of system uniformity and security for the grower that
the growing media is completely wet.
     Some overwatering may be necessary under specific conditions, especially
in greenhouse drip irrigation systems, plant-to-plant differences and differences
between locations. For example, outer rows may require more water than
centre rows, given the higher radiation received from the lateral walls of the
structure and therefore lack of plant-to-plant shade. Another example: water
movement by capillarity may be slower compared with the reference flow in
growing media with big particle size (e.g. perlite). Therefore, in order to ­assure
complete water coverage in the medium, growers may intentionally allow
drainage of water and fertilizer. Recommendations for irrigation drainage in
soilless media change depending on the medium, season and the crop stage.
Even though irrigation based on drainage allows for economic losses of water
and fertilizer, it assures that, after every irrigation cycle, the medium is com-
pletely wet again. If slabs are too dry, root hairs will be damaged, EC may be-
come excessive, nutrient uptake may be reduced and plant growth will become
harder. In this case, plants would have thin stems and small dark leaves. On the
other hand, excessively wet slabs will decrease aeration, increase the potential
for root disease and result in softer vegetative growth and poor rooting.
     By matching the amount of water provided to plant demands, fertilizer
runoff and water use can be minimized. In addition to adverse environmental
impacts, provision of water in excess of plant requirements can reduce the
amount of air available in the root zone (Adams, 1999). In the field, this is
most frequently a problem with poorly draining soils or those with subsurface
hardpans. In soilless culture, low oxygen levels generally occur in hot weather
because the available oxygen in the solution decreases as the root zone tem-
perature rises. Root zone temperatures above 25°C are said to be deleterious for
greenhouse tomato production. Low root-zone oxygen can occur in either the
field or the greenhouse but it is most common in peat-based greenhouse sub-
strates, because they have a higher water-holding capacity (i.e. drain less freely
188                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


than stone wool or perlite). In peat, overwatering can lead to iron deficiency,
which must be corrected with a reduction in amount of watering and an add-
ition of iron to the feed (Adams, 1999).


Moisture monitoring and sensors

In hydroponic systems, drain measurement equipment and weighing gutters
are commonly used to monitor irrigation. An irrigation sensor is any instru-
ment that can measure some type of physical or chemical factor related to the
water content of the root medium. It is important to keep in mind that all sen-
sors have a measurement error margin. There are three key components that
need to be considered to reduce this error: accuracy, repeatability (also called
precision) and resolution. The ideal sensor would combine high accuracy with
repeatability and adequate resolution, a combination that will generally result
in increased price (Van Iersel et al., 2013).
       Monitoring soil or medium moisture is one of the most important steps
in preventing water stress and eventual wilting of tomato. Its importance is
­accentuated by the role irrigation plays in nutrient distribution and uptake,
 salt leaching and temperature control in open fields and inside protective struc-
 tures. When designing a comprehensive water monitoring system, both open
 field and greenhouse growers should consider three basic steps: (i) determin-
 ation of irrigation efficiency; (ii) use of moisture sensors; and (iii) adjusting
 according to growing stages.
       Firstly, after the water use of the crop has been determined, the efficiency
 of the delivery of the irrigation system (e.g. drip, subsurface, sprinkler) must be
 verified to compensate for the water losses due to delivery. For instance, most
 drip irrigation systems have irrigation efficiencies between 80% and 95%, in
 comparison with approximately 60% from sprinkler irrigation. Secondly, the
 correct use of water monitoring equipment allows growers to save water and
 to improve crop nutrition. There are several types of monitoring sensors: two
 of the most common are those that measure water tension and probes that
 measure volumetric water content. Tensiometers are the most common among
 the first group, giving a measurement of the tension at which water is retained
 in the soil or medium pores. An increase in soil moisture causes a decline in soil
 tension readings. These instruments are pressurized plastic ­cylinders with a
 porous ceramic cup in the lower part, a gauge on the top and an inner chamber
 filled with water. When the tube is inserted in the soil, water is suctioned out
 of the tensiometer through the porous ceramic cup and a negative pressure
 is created inside the tube, which is measured as negative pressure or tension.
 These devices are easy to use and relatively inexpensive but require routine
 maintenance to eliminate algae growth in the inner chamber and they can
 only be placed in fixed locations throughout the planted fields. In most soils,
 typical water tension at field capacity may be between 5 and 15 centibars
                             Irrigation and Fertilization                     189


(cbar). However, depending on the texture of the soil, more or less water would
be needed to reach this desired tension. For instance, a sandy soil may need to
have a volumetric water content of around 10–14%, whereas the same tension
will be reached in a clay soil with 21–26%. This is due to the higher number
and volume of micropores available in clay as opposed to sandy soil. Soilless
media operate under similar principles; on the other hand, volumetric probes
give a direct measurement of soil moisture and can be classified in two groups:
capacitance sensors and time domain reflectometry (TDR) sensors. Although
both are based on different principles, they provide instantaneous measure-
ments of soil moisture with a small margin of error. One advantage of these
sensors, particularly the TDR, is their practicality, because a single unit can be
used to measure moisture in multiple fields. However, they cost more than sim-
pler units such as tensiometers. Finally, a comprehensive irrigation monitoring
system requires constant adjustments and supervision. For example, irriga-
tion could be suspended for relatively long periods of time after heavy rains in
open field production to avoid overwatering the crop. In protected culture, very
cloudy or cold days reduce the ETo and thus the needed irrigation volumes, as
described above. Table 6.2 describes alternative irrigation sensors.


FERTILIZATION AND FERTIGATION

Nutrition principles and essential nutrients

The goal of applying fertilizer for plant growth in soil or soilless media is to
match the amount provided as fertilizer to the nutrient uptake of the crop as
closely as possible. Currently, one of the main concerns of producing crops
under intensive irrigation and fertilization is the risk of polluting both above-
and below-ground water sources. Using appropriate fertilization programmes
in combination with correct irrigation strategies reduces excessive leaching
and runoff, thus limiting their environmental impact. The objective of this sec-
tion is to describe the general nutrition principles and most common fertiliza-
tion practices for tomato production.
     Essential nutrients are elements needed to complete the plant cycle. These
elements are irreplaceable for a vital reaction or structure. Essential nutrients
must be differentiated from ‘beneficial elements’, which are elements that could
improve growth, specific functions or plant structures. There are 17 ­essential
elements for plant growth and development: hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), carbon
(C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), magnesium
(Mg), sulfur (S), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), boron (B), copper (Cu),
molybdenum (Mo), chlorine (Cl) and nickel (Ni). The first three are freely ob-
tained from the atmosphere and water. The remaining nutrients are divided
into two groups (macronutrients and micronutrients) based on their absorbed
volumes. The macronutrients are N, P, K, Ca, Mg and S, whereas Fe, Mn, Zn,
190                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


Table 6.2. Alternatives for soil water measurement methods used for irrigation
scheduling. (Maughan et al., 2015.)

                 Type of                Quality of
Method           measurement            measurement            Cost

Porous block     Electrical resistance Requires calibration Data logger/reader
                   of a porous block     to soil water        $500 to $1000,
                                         content. Sensitive   then $40 per
                                         to temperature       sensor (2–5 per
                                         and soil salinity    site)
Neutron probe Neutron                  Estimates water in a Neutron Probe
                   thermalization        larger area than     ($10,000) plus
                   as a function of      most soil measure    $15 per access
                   water content         methods. Requires    tube. Regular
                                         calibration to soil  dosimetry analysis
                                         water content        and record
                                                              keeping
Frequency        Electromagnetic soil Accurate after         Data logger or
  domain probe     capacitance as a      calibration to soil  reader $500 to
                   function of water     water content.       $3000, then
                   content               Relatively           $280+ per sensor
                                         insensitive to soil  (2–5 per site).
                                         water salinity       Access tube
                                         levels               installation kit
                                                              $2600
Heat dissipation Uses heat buffering Requires calibration Data logger/reader
                   capacity of soil      to soil water        $500 to $3000,
                   and thermal           content. Quite       then $155 per
                   conductivity of       accurate and         sensor (2–5 per
                   soil water            relatively           site)
                                         insensitive to soil
                                         water salinity
                                         levels



B, Cu, Mo, Cl and Ni are considered micronutrients. Several other elements
are beneficial, such as cobalt (Co), sodium (Na) and silicon (Si) (Barker and
Pilbeam, 2007). Some of the most important functions and deficiency and tox-
icity symptoms of the most absorbed nutrients are discussed below.

Nitrogen
This element is part of the building blocks for amino acids, enzymes, nucleic
acids and energetic compounds. Under hot, bright growing conditions, N must
be adequate for plants to grow rapidly, but high N levels encourage vegetative
growth, which can be detrimental to reproductive growth under low light.
Typically, N levels are kept relatively low until fruit set to promote reproductive
                              Irrigation and Fertilization                      191


growth. In soilless culture, the ratio of N to other nutrients is closely controlled
to encourage either reproductive or vegetative growth, depending on the grow-
er’s perception of crop needs. Tomato plants have different absorption rates of
N at various stages of growth. The N absorption by tomato plants during the
formation of the first two to three flower trusses is about the same as for K. As
the fruit load increases, so does the K uptake, resulting in a K:N uptake of 1.5:1
or 2:1. Excessive pruning, use of fertilizer and water under low light conditions
early in the production cycle will result in an overly vegetative plant prone to
disease and poor flower development, poor fruit set and size (OMAFRA, 2001).
Lower N feed during this phase helps to control plant growth and makes the
plant more generative. Plant growth can also be slowed by increasing the K:N
ratio in the fertilizer, increasing EC by irrigating less frequently and in lower
amounts, and reducing RH.
      N limitation reduces chlorophyll concentration and thus absorption and
light harvesting (De Groot et al., 2003). Deficiencies of N are sometimes hard
to detect without a well fertilized control for comparison. Growth may be re-
duced overall, so the plants are stunted, but leaves may look healthy, except for
being a paler green than normal. Symptoms appear first on the lower leaves
and continue to be more pronounced there, as N is a mobile element, moving
from older to younger tissue. Symptoms at the top of the plant include pale
flowers rather than deep yellow and a main stem that is thin at the top. The
whole plant has a spindly appearance. Rather than the foliage being lush or
succulent, leaves are small, erect and hard. Over time, the whole plant can turn
yellow, flowers drop and fruits remain small. Plants may mature early, but fruit
yield and quality decline (Guidi et al., 1997).
      Most cases of toxicity caused by N produce dark green leaves, sometimes
thickened and brittle. At the top of the plant, stems remain thick and new leaves
may curl into a ball. Clusters of flowers are large but fruit set may be poor.
Although leaf growth is initially promoted, it is eventually restricted under ex-
cessive N. Plants may be more susceptible to diseases and insects (Jones, 1999).
The applied N form is also an important consideration in guarding against
toxicity. Tomato is much more sensitive to N in the ammonium form than in
the nitrate form, especially under low light. The early symptoms of ammo-
nium toxicity are small chlorotic spots on the leaves, which later turn necrotic
(brown and dead). Spot size may increase, covering the entire interveinal area,
giving the leaf a scorched appearance, and leaf margins may roll up. Lesions
may also occur on the stems. As the plant matures, the vascular tissue at the
base of the plants begins to deteriorate, with wilting occurring during periods
of high atmospheric demand, followed by plant death (Jones, 1999).
      Cation–anion ratio in tomato tissue is generally balanced. However, fer-
tilization programmes with high ammonium (NH+4) or nitrate (NO3–) concen-
tration will result in pH changes in plant tissue and nutrient solution in both
soil and soilless conditions. Ion uptake in tomato plants is accompanied by a
corresponding exchange from the root. Therefore, the uptake of nitrate causes
192                     B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


excretion of hydroxyl or bicarbonate, while ammonium uptake is balanced by
exchanging hydrogen with the nutrient solution or soil solution (Kirkby and
Mengel, 1966). Nitrate in plant tissues is reduced to nitrite, and during this
process hydrogen carbonate (HCO3–) and carbon dioxide (CO2) are produced,
increasing the organic acid content in plant tissue. Part of the generated HCO3–
and CO2 diffuses out of the root tissue and increases the nutrient solution pH.
On the contrary, ammonium uptake will lead to the production of H+, which
will lower the pH of plant tissues and reduce the accumulation of organic acid
anions (Kirkby and Mengel, 1966). It is important to regulate nitrate and am-
monium in tomato fertilization from a practical pH management standpoint.

Phosphorus
Some of the functions of P in plants are as part of the energy compounds, such
as adenosine diphosphate and triphosphate (ADP and ATP). It is a basic com-
ponent of enzymes, proteins, phospholipids and nucleic acids. Although P is
used in much smaller quantities than N and K, it must also be provided con-
tinuously. Initially, P is important for early fruit growth, especially under cool
soil conditions when P uptake decreases, but later it is necessary for vegetative
growth and fruit set. Phosphorus is stored well in soil but is easily leached in
peat media and less available at high pH.
     Deficient plants show symptoms on the lower leaves and stems. Plants ap-
pear stunted and upper leaf surfaces may turn unusually dark green. A char-
acteristic red or purple colour on the undersides of the leaves (including the
veins) and stem appears later, starting on the older leaves. Leaves are small
and curved slightly downwards. Plants become slender, with thin stems, and
cluster development is poor. P limitation reduces the functioning of photo-
system II (De Groot et al., 2003). Roots become brown and develop few lateral
branches. Low rooting-zone and air temperatures can also reduce P uptake,
and cause the purple pigmentation typical of P deficiency (Besford, 1980;
Hosier and Bradley, 1999). Toxicities due to P excess are uncommon but can
occasionally be seen as slow plant growth, with visual symptoms related to Zn
deficiency. These symptoms can be severe, as large sections of the leaves turn
light brown, giving a burned appearance. This is particularly noticeable on an-
aerobic rooting conditions (Jones, 1999).

Potassium
This element functions in the enzyme activation, protein synthesis and in the
adjustment of the osmotic potential of tissues, including stomata. It is required
for best fruit quality and to regulate growth; as a major nutrient with a posi-
tive charge, K balances the negative charges of organic acids produced within
the cell and those anions such as sulfates, chlorides and nitrates. Potassium
levels are particularly important at transplanting, to prevent subsequent plant
growth problems and future ripening disorders. The ratio of N:K is also im-
portant in controlling growth. Tomato plants extract 250–500 kg K/ha per
                              Irrigation and Fertilization                     193


growing season, with 2/3 of all K allocated to the fruit when fully mature
(Besford and Maw, 1974).
     Major deficiencies are shown as reduced growth and chlorotic spots in
older leaves, especially along the leaf margins, which could degenerate to nec-
rotic areas. Potassium deficiency is first expressed as dark green foliage, which
later turns purplish brown. Marginal chlorosis and necrosis appear first on the
lowest leaves, then progress up the plant. Like N and P, K is phloem-mobile and
young leaves are the last affected. Chlorosis almost always ­occurs first at the
margins of older leaves, which often curve downwards. Later chlorosis moves
into the interveinal areas towards the centre of the leaf and ­necrosis of leaf
margins follows. In advanced stages, the small veins lose their colour, older
leaves become severely scorched and drop, young leaves turn yellow and ­remain
small, plant growth is restricted and fruit ripening is uneven. Postharvest
quality is also poor (Jones, 1999). Interveinal chlorosis is also symptomatic of
low Mg and the two deficiencies are sometimes confused.
     Compared with Mg deficiency, K deficiency is more likely to occur along
the leaf margins and is also more likely to develop into necrotic spots. Problems
with fruit quality, such as blotchy ripening, boxy fruit and even to some extent
greenback, are associated with low levels of K and some cases can be counter-
acted with high-K feeds (OMAFRA, 2001). Plant biomass can be reduced by
Mg deficiency, induced by heavy K fertilization. Kabu and Toop (1970) ­reported
a reduction of stem tissue Mg under high K fertilization in greenhouse tomato.
Ions of similar size and valence interact, causing deficiencies. Cellular bidding
sites of the plant cannot distinguish between K, Ca and Mg ions. Thus, media
concentration of these ions will influence the rate of adsorption and competi-
tion. Uptake of K can also be reduced on anaerobic rooting conditions and low
root-zone temperatures. Although K toxicities are rare, very high rates of K
may induce Ca or Mg deficiency or salinity damage. Reductions in yield occur
at very high levels of K, when K:N ratio in the liquid feed is too high, or when
both N and K are too high.

Calcium, magnesium and sulfur
Calcium is a basic component of cell walls and it is involved in cell elongation
and division, and in enzyme and hormone activity. Its role in the formation
of structures gives tissues rigidity and strength. Deficiencies of this nutrient
occur in younger leaves and fruit, including disorders such as blossom-end rot
and burning of leaf tips and edges. Magnesium is the centre of the chlorophyll
molecule, thus it has a direct influence on the green of leaves. It is also related
to the many enzymatic reactions in the plant together with K, Na and NH4 cat-
ions. Deficiencies are first noticed in the older leaves as mottling. Both Ca and
Mg are cations absorbed mostly by mass flow and need to be balanced to avoid
blocking each other’s root uptake. In soils, it is desirable to have Ca:Mg propor-
tions between 4:1 to 5:1 (Hao and Papadopoulos, 2004). Sulfur is required as
being a component of the essential amino acids cysteine and methionine, the
194                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


formation of S bonds in some hormones, vitamins, glucosides, sulfolipids and
coenzymes. Deficiencies are rare – though in field crops they are increasing
lately due to the reduction of atmospheric S deposition, mainly from burned
fossil fuels – and resemble those caused by lack of N.

Micronutrients
Iron is part of several enzymes, as well as a component of proteins during respir-
ation (Römheld and Nikolic, 2007). It is necessary for the formation of chlorophyll
and it serves as an activator of respiration and photosynthesis. Its deficiency can
be induced by heavy Mn fertilization, while low pH allows for higher solubility and
availability of Fe. Iron deficiency symptoms include chlorosis of the interveinal
part of young leaves and in some cases death of the entire plant (Lohry, 2007).
      Manganese is an enzyme activator and it is used in the synthesis of certain
amino acids and lignin (Humphries et al., 2007). It participates in chlorophyll
formation along with Fe. Conversely, high Mn fertilization may result in Fe
­deficiency. Symptoms of Mn deficiency generally include interveinal chlorosis,
 with darker colour next to the veins (Lohry, 2007).
      Zinc is a structural constituent of several essential enzymes, including
 some that are needed for synthesis of histidine, glutamine and asparagine with
 more than 80 Zn-containing proteins reported. High concentration of Ca and
 P can affect Zn uptake. Within plant tissues, Zn translocation to shoots could
 be inhibited by high bicarbonate concentration. Zinc deficiency symptoms
 include decreased stem length and fruit bud formation, mottled leaves and
 interveinal chlorosis (Lohry, 2007).
      Boron is needed for the formation of reproductive structures and metabolite
 transport across membranes, and it is required for root elongation and protein
 and nucleic acid metabolism. Boron deficiency results in a wide range of nutri-
 tional disorders. Symptoms of B deficiency include internode shortening, discol-
 oured buds and youngest leaves and flower, and fruit dropping. Cells may keep
 dividing but plant structures may not differentiate in its absence (Lohry, 2007).
      Copper activates several enzymes and improves C fixation and electron
 transport. Deficiency symptoms include chlorotic leaves with blue-green mar-
 gins and drop of flowers and fruits (Lohry, 2007). Molybdenum is essential for
 the nitrate and nitrogenase reductase enzymes and it plays a role in the oxi-
 dation of sulfite to sulfate. Chlorine is required for the activity of at least four
 essential enzymes in plants and it is an essential cofactor in the photosynthetic
 process. Nickel has been shown to be needed by certain non-redox and redox
 enzymes in several plant species.


Nutrient requirements and sufficiency

For field-grown tomatoes, a clear knowledge of the nutrient requirements
is needed to design an effective fertilization programme. This requirement
                              Irrigation and Fertilization                     195


will ­depend intrinsically on the crop type and its yield potential (Phillips
et al., 2009) and it could be supplied from three main sources of nutrients:
(i) ­atmospheric deposition and inputs; (ii) the natural soil supply; and (iii) the
applied fertilizers. The former is important in the case of the essential elem-
ents C, H and O, which are in most cases under non-limiting conditions, and
for S deposition in the form of acid rain (Ceccotti et al., 1998). Nonetheless,
the soil supply and added fertilizers provide the majority of the crop nutrient
requirements. For both bare ground and under plastic mulch production, it is
suggested that growing media pH values initially be 6.0–6.5 and that the soil
be tested ­before pre-plant fertilizers are added. If pH needs to be increased, pre-
plant lime or dolomite application could be used. On the contrary, when pH
must be ­reduced, application of elemental S would be necessary. In order for
the soil reaction to occur, a period of 2–3 months might be needed from the
time of the amendment application to planting. As mentioned above, plant nu-
trient uptake may affect the pH of the nutrient solution. It is necessary to keep
a record of pH changes in nutrient solution for both soil and soilless conditions.
This will allow the fertilization programme to be adjusted for sudden changes
in pH levels. Many greenhouse growers keep a daily record of pH in soilless
production. Open field production allows for a longer period of time in between
measurements, given the buffer properties of the soil. However, this will de-
pend on the soil’s physical and chemical properties.
      Based on soil test results, N, P, K, Mg and Ca are usually added at pre-­
planting, even if the crop is to be fertigated later. Pre-plant application can be
broadcast and disked in or side-dressed in bands 10 cm deep and 10 cm from
the row at planting. The application can also be split between the two methods
of incorporation. For greenhouse crops, there are different methods to es-
tablish tomato seedlings, namely stone wool blocks or containers filled with
growing media (e.g. bags, pots and troughs). In most cases, nutrient solution
should have a pH of 5.5–6.5 and an EC of 1.5–2.0 dS/m to maximize nutrient
availability and avoid salinity toxicity. After the transplants are established,
the EC of the nutrient solution could reach 3.0–3.5 dS/m, based on available
light, rate of growth, plant vigour, available moisture and temperature regime
(OMAFRA, 2001).
      It is important to clarify that EC levels are commonly measured at three
different points within the production system: (i) at the entry point (emitter);
(ii) media or soil solution extraction; or (iii) drainage water (in soilless pro-
duction). Levels of EC tend to change depending on the measurement point.
Entry EC is usually a result of the fertilization programme. Within the growing
medium, EC level changes will depend on the fertilization programme, water
status of the media, plant uptake and ion content in the medium. Values of EC
in the drainage water will be related to the remaining ions of the solution, after
plant and media uptake and water losses are taken into account. Depending
on the cultivar, soil-grown tomatoes are moderately sensitive to soil salinity,
­compared with other vegetables, with a maximum threshold for yield loss
196                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


of 2.5 dS/m and a 10% yield decrease per dS/m above this threshold (Maas,
1984). Where salinity is high, but not as extreme, fruit quality and soluble
solids may increase with increasing soil salinity, just as in soilless systems.
      While seasonal tomato nutrient absorption will vary according to par-
ticular growing conditions, nutrient removal will strongly depend on the
growing habits of the cultivars. For instance, determinate tomato varieties are
mostly planted in open fields and last between 3 and 4 months from trans-
planting to the end of commercially feasible harvests. On the other hand,
indeterminate cultivars are produced for 10–16 months under protective
structures, such as greenhouses and high tunnels (Table 6.3). In both cases,
removal of N, P and K are the largest on a per-weight basis. Other nutrients,
such as Ca and Mg, need to be closely monitored to maintain an appropriate
ratio, as previously described.
      Monitoring the nutritional status of the tomato plants is an essential task,
regardless of the production system. Several methodologies exist to assess this
nutritional status. These methods range from very simplistic to sophisticated
approaches. Regardless of the chosen methodology, none provides a 100%
­accurate prediction or adjustment of the fertilization programme and, in many
 cases, a combination is preferred for different essential elements. Additionally,
 the nature and functions of each one of the essential elements for crop pro-
 duction along with the specific conditions of the farm and crop will dictate the
 necessary adjustments of the applied nutrient rates and thus the fertilization
 programme.
      The two most common methods to determine the nutritional situation of
 tomato are: (i) petiole sap concentration; and (ii) diagnostic plant part ana-
 lysis. These methods could be used alone or in conjunction with the others to
 manage programmes for crops that have multiple moments of fertilizer appli-
 cation (i.e. drip-applied nutrients and split side-dressing applications). Petiole
 sap concentration is a real-time measurement of ions flowing through the
 plant vascular system and serves as a quick diagnostic tool for determining
 deficiencies and adjusting fertilization programmes, especially for NO3– and K
 (Hochmuth, 1994). These tests are accurate and inexpensive but sufficiency
 values must be determined and validated for each crop prior to analysis.
      The use of diagnostic plant parts has been the most typical ‘in-season’
 diagnostic method for decades. The most recently expanded mature leaf is

Table 6.3. Nutrient removal by tomato grown in the field and greenhouses. (Halliday
and Trenkel, 1992; Jones, 1999; OMAFRA, 2001; Sonneveld and Voogt, 2009.)

                                Field crop (yield                Greenhouse crop
Nutrient (kg/ha)                 of 40–50 t/ha)                  (yield of 500 t/ha)

N                                   100–150                            1000
P2O5                                 20–40                              500
K2O                                 150–300                            1500
                              Irrigation and Fertilization                      197


collected, dried and ground for nutrient analysis. Some of the advantages of
this method are its accuracy and broad range of nutrients that can be detected
with one sample. However, it needs to be performed before or when deficiencies
are barely suspected, because the samples need to be dried and may be sent to
commercial laboratories for analysis. A potential limitation of this method is
that the whole process could last from 5 to 15 days, which could be too late to
correct deficiencies. The nutrient sufficiency contents in mature tomato leaves
and acceptable leaf petiole concentrations of NO3-N and K are presented in
Tables 6.4 and 6.5. These ranges serve as reference values for tomato produc-
tion and should be confirmed depending on the growing conditions.


Fertilization programmes

Nutrient rates
Accurate management of a fertilization programme seeks to reduce nutrient
losses to the minimum and to enhance plant absorption. When designing an
effective fertilization programme, the rate, sources, timing and placement of
fertilizers must be considered (Roberts, 2007; Bruulsema et al., 2009). It is
widely known that a single nutrient programme is unpractical because of the
differences across locations, soils, seasons, cultivars, fertilization practices and
production techniques. Instead, a fertilization programme relies on in-farm
conditions (e.g. irrigation and available equipment), as well as external situ-
ations (e.g. fertilizer prices and environmental regulations). For open field
production in soil, fertilization programmes need to estimate the soil nutrient
supply potential to avoid over-fertilization. In some cases, the rate of fertil-
izer may be higher than needed to compensate for the absence of nutrients
in the soil and restore soil fertility (Phillips et al., 2009). In greenhouse and
high tunnel production where inert media are used, all the nutrients must be
­applied through the irrigation lines. A common way of managing nutrient
 levels in this production system would be by EC measurements. The exception
 could be when some organic growing amendments (e.g. composted substrate,
 peat moss) are utilized due to their potential nutrient contributions.
       Determination of the adequate nutrient rate is also dependent on the as-
 sessment of the possible nutrient losses. These losses could be due to biological
 and mineral immobilization, volatilization, leaching and runoff. Biological and
 mineral immobilization occurs when soil microbes, such as bacteria, use C atoms
 as energy source or build mineral blocks as part of the mineralization process. A
 typical example of this process is N fixation by microbes in the presence of a high
 C:N ratio (Bengtsson et al., 2002). Volatilization of ammonia (NH3) and nitrous
 oxide (N2O) are two cases of N losses in soils due to microbial activity (Reddy
 et al., 1979; Snyder et al., 2007). Nutrient leaching and runoff are two physic-
 ally driven processes that could cause severe nutrient depletion in soils. Heavy
 NO3– leaching to ground waters is one of the main causes of eutrophication in
                                                                                                                                         198




                                                                                                                                         B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada
Table 6.4. Plant nutrient relative sufficiency concentration on a dry weight basis in newly opened mature leaves of tomato foliar
tissue. (Maynard and Hochmuth, 2007; Olson et al., 2012.)

                   N         P          K            Ca      Mg          S         Fe        Mn        Zn         Cu    B           Mo

Growth stage                                   (%)                                                      (mg/kg)

5-leaf stage    3.0–5.0   0.3–0.6    3.0–5.0   1.0–2.0     0.3–0.5    0.3–0.8   40–100     30–100    25–40    5–15     20–40   0.2–0.6
First flower    2.8–4.0   0.2–0.4    2.5–4.0   1.0–2.0     0.3–0.5    0.3–0.8   40–100     30–100    25–40    5–15     20–40   0.2–0.6
Harvest         2.0–3.0   0.2–0.4    1.5–2.5   1.0–2.0    0.25–0.5    0.3–0.6   40–100     30–100    20–40    5–10     20–40   0.2–0.6
                               Irrigation and Fertilization                       199


Table 6.5. Testing guidelines for tomato leaf petiole fresh sap NO3-N and K.
(Sanders, 2004; Olson et al., 2012.)

                                        Fresh petiole sap concentration (mg/kg or ppm)

Development stage/time                    NO3-N                           K

First buds                              1000–200                     3500–4000
First open flowers                       600–800                     3500–4000
Fruit 50 mm diameter                     400–600                     3000–3500
First harvest                            300–400                     2500–3000




rivers and lakes. Runoff of P and S may occur from fertilized fields and have been
reported as another source of pollution into ground waters and lakes (Moore
et al., 2000; Bates et al., 2002). Fertilizer management practices that enhance
crop absorption of available and applied nutrients are the basis for sustainability
of production systems and the efficacy of fertilization programmes. This is dir-
ectly linked to the amount of nutrients applied for crop production. Different
production systems will utilize varying techniques to achieve sustainability. In
open field production, the soil will allow for a certain level of error in the fertil-
ization programme, while in soilless production the nutrient solution will be the
primary source of chemical change in the medium. Closed soilless systems with
water recirculation will depend 100% on the nutrient solution and the potential
adjustment that growers apply. A compilation of macronutrient rates for tomato
production from selected references is presented in Table 6.6.


Fertigation systems and scheduling
Fertigation is the most common method for applying fertilizers and water at
the same time and it requires precise scheduling to maximize the efficiency of
nutrient and water absorption. In this section, fertigation scheduling, injec-
tion equipment and fertilizer sources are discussed. Examples of scheduling
of greenhouse and open field tomato production are presented in Tables 6.7
and 6.8.
     Under protected culture, all fertigation systems have their own character-
istics, which will affect the functionality of the system. There are two major
micro-irrigation methods for vegetable crops: drip irrigation and microsprin-
klers. Drip irrigation is the most used and inexpensive of the two methods. For
drip irrigation systems, the type, number and distance between drip emitters,
the injection system, the number of valves and the uniformity coefficient are
some of the parameters to consider when calculating the water discharge.
Knowing this total discharge will allow the application of the correct water
volumes and calculation of fertilizer rate. Other important factors to consider
are as follows.
200                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


Table 6.6. Ranges of macronutrient rates for maximum growth and yield of
tomato types in nutrient-deficient soils from selected research reports. (IMCC, 1984;
Kaniszewski et al., 1987; Baselga-Yrisarry et al., 1993; Seliga and Shattuck, 1995;
Andersen et al., 1999; Sainju et al., 2001; Maynard and Hochmuth, 2007; Sanchez,
2007; Olson et al., 2012.)

Optimum range (kg/ha)         Comments

Nitrogen (N)
   134–202                    Determinate tomato, pre-plant fertilization, open field,
                                drip irrigation
   90–180                     Determinate tomato, broadcast split in three doses
   90–135                     Determinate tomato, pre-plant incorporation
   150–225                    Determinate tomato, without and with irrigation
   50–150                     Processing tomato
   198                        Determinate tomato
   220                        Tomato, drip or seepage irrigation
   88–99                      Fresh tomato fresh in mid-Atlantic, USA
   220                        Fresh tomato in Florida, USA
   154–176                    Fresh tomato in New England, USA
Phosphorus (P)
   53                         Determinate tomato
   220                        Tomato, drip or seepage irrigation
   55–83                      Tomato, sandy soil, very low to medium P level
   88–176                     Fresh tomato fresh in mid-Atlantic, USA
   110–165                    Fresh tomato in Florida, USA
   55–220                     Fresh tomato in New England, USA
Potassium (K)
   370                        Determinate tomato
   220–242                    Tomato, drip or seepage irrigation
   88–176                     Fresh tomato fresh in mid-Atlantic, USA
   110–248                    Fresh tomato in Florida, USA
   110–275                    Fresh tomato in New England, USA



Table 6.7. Fertigation schedule (kg/ha) for indeterminate tomatoes grown in stone
wool slabs. (OMAFRA, 2001.)

Growth stage       N     P     K     Ca    Mg    Fe    Mn      Zn    B     Cu    Mo

Slab saturation   200    50   353   247 75      0.8   0.55 0.33 0.5       0.05 0.05
4–6 weeks after   180    50   400   190 75      0.8   0.55 0.33 0.5       0.05 0.05
  planting
Normal feed       190    50   400   190 65      0.8   0.55 0.33 0.5       0.05 0.05
Heavy fruit       210    50   420   190 75      0.8   0.55 0.33 0.5       0.05 0.05
  load
                              Irrigation and Fertilization                      201


Table 6.8. Suggested fertigation schedule (kg/ha) for field-grown tomato plants in
the south-eastern USA on low-K soils. (Sanders, 2004.)

Days after
planting          Daily N      Daily K2O           Cumulative N    Cumulative K2O

Pre-plant                                                 56            140
0–14                0.56           0.56                   64            148
15–28               0.78           1.58                   75            170
29–42               1.13           2.25                   90            202
43–56               1.69           3.35                  114            249
57–77               2.81           5.60                  173            367
78–98               3.38           6.75                  237            495


•   Type of solid pipes and drip emitters. These include the lateral pipes and
    single-wall drip tapes that deliver water to the emitters. Drip tapes usually
    work at pressures between 1 and 3 bar and deliver 1–2 l/h per emitter.
    These are very susceptible to emitter obstruction due to debris or algae and
    do not possess a great deal of uniformity when located in slopes. A vari-
    ation of this type of tape is the double-walled drip tape, which could be
    used for more than one season. All these drip tapes could be autocompen-
    sated and/or anti-drainage. The former type allows uniform water volume
    distribution at a minimum working pressure, whereas the latter stops irri-
    gation when pressure drops below certain threshold.
•   Average emitter delivery. The average discharge per emitter could change
    depending on environmental conditions, pressure and distance from
    the pumping station. There is a very practical method to determine the
    average emitter delivery, using emitters at the beginning and end of each
    line and selecting several lines along the feeding lateral lines. Then coef-
    ficient of uniformity is determined by dividing the lowest output by the
    average volume. Coefficients around 90% are excellent.
•   Number of drip lines. The number of tapes per bed is important to create
    a wet front as soon as possible, to avoid overuse of water pumps. Also, the
    number of lines per planted area will help to determine the total water
    volume needed for a given irrigation event.
•   Distance between emitters. Most drip tapes in the market have emitters
    between 10 cm and 30 cm apart. The distance between plants may dictate
    the appropriate emitter distance, with short in-row distances requiring
    closer emitters than widely spaced plants.

      Besides the irrigation set-up, the most common types of fertilizer applica-
tors for fertigation are: (i) suction injectors (commonly known as ‘Venturi’);
(ii) constant-concentration injectors; and (iii) computerized injection nozzles.
Suction injectors use a physical principle to generate differential pressure in
the main water line, which creates suction into a secondary line that pulls
202                      B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


f­ertilizer from the injection tanks. The advantages of this system are that
 these ­devices are inexpensive and easy to install and manage, as long as water
 pressure ­remains relatively constant. The disadvantage is that fertilizer injec-
 tion could be variable when water pressure and temperature fluctuate, which
 could lead to irregular nutrition. Constant-concentration injectors possess a
 piston pump or diaphragm that draws liquid fertilizer from a non-pressurized
 container and mixes it with pressurized water into the main lines. These in-
 jectors can be either electric or hydraulically driven and require a minimum
 working pressure. They are more expensive and require more maintenance
 than the ‘Venturi’ but are more efficient and precise. A more expensive but
 precise method is the computerized injection nozzles. These use computer-
 ized consoles that can be programmed to deliver the selected fertilizer volume
 at the right time into the water stream. Whether a simple or a sophisticated
 method is used to fertigate, it is recommended that application rates should be
 checked periodically to ensure proper rates.
      With regards to fertilizer sources, especially in protected culture, there are
 two main formulations: (i) solid compound salts; and (ii) liquid fertilizers. In
 many parts of the world, it is common to mix solid fertilizer (hydrosoluble) salts
 with water in large tanks. This method facilitates fertilizer transport to remote
 areas. However, it requires the constant use of labour to produce the mix and
 several fertilizer tanks to avoid precipitation and volatilization of some mater-
 ials. Additionally, injection water must have a relatively high temperature (to
 allow the nutrients to stay in solution) and low salt content. All these factors
 increase the chances for human error during the process. During the appli-
 cation of hydrosoluble fertilizers, it is common to have several tanks to avoid
 combination of reactive sources. For example, a concentrated tank with Ca2+
 will react with concentrated phosphatic and sulfatic sources, forming either
 calcium phosphate or calcium sulfate, which can form solid deposits that even-
 tually will clog the irrigation emitters. For this reason, growers will have one
 tank with a Ca source (e.g. calcium nitrate and potassium nitrate) and another
 with sulfates (e.g. sulfate of potash and magnesium sulfate) and phosphates
 (e.g. monoammonium phosphate and monopotassium phosphate). Typically a
 third tank will be used for phosphate for practicality in the daily changes in the
 fertilization programme. A fourth tank may contain acids, such as phosphoric
 acid for pH levelling and line-cleaning purposes.
      Liquid fertilizers contain predesigned concentrations of nutrients, as ei-
 ther a single or compound salt, that are delivered directly through the irriga-
 tion stream without further mixing. This method is more costly than soluble
 salts, because it requires the transport of the fertilizer already dissolved in
 water. However, it minimizes the risks for human error during application and
 the costs of maintenance and purchase of large tanks and injection equip-
 ment. Similarly, these sources reduce precipitation of nutrients, provided that
 temperatures do not drop below 10°C.
                                Irrigation and Fertilization                          203


Foliar sprays
Foliar sprays should be avoided because of the potential damage to the ­foliage
from spraying in hot or bright weather and because leaves do not absorb
­nutrients well, but they are sometimes used under emergency conditions while
 the situation around the root zone is corrected. Foliar sprays of urea dissolved
 in water at 2.5 g/l can be applied to correct a severe N deficiency. For P defi-
 ciency, foliar sprays with potassium or ammonium phosphate are possible but
 are not recommended, as they can cause serious leaf damage. For K deficiency,
 the crop may be sprayed with a solution of 20 g/l potassium sulfate. To correct
 Ca deficiency quickly, plants can be sprayed with a solution of 2–7 g/l or a
 0.3% calcium chloride solution. Such sprays are rarely beneficial in correcting
 ­blossom-end rot, since as discussed above Ca absorbed through the leaves
  cannot move readily into the fruit. Hence, only the Ca that lands on the fruit
  surface is utilized (Adams, 1999). Magnesium deficiencies can also be cor-
  rected with sprays of magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts). Roosta (2011) reported
  that foliar spray of all elements significantly increased plant fruit number and
  yield in the aquaponics in order of K > Fe > Mn > Zn > Mg > B. In the hydro-
  ponics, foliar application of K, Mg and Zn increased fruit number and yield of
  plants compared with control.


REFERENCES

Adams, P. (1991) Effects of increasing the salinity of the nutrients solution with major
     nutrients or sodium chloride on the yield, quality and composition of tomato
     grown in rockwool. Journal of Horticultural Science 66, 201–207.
Adams, P. (1999) Plant nutrition demystified. Acta Horticulturae 481, 341–344.
Adams, P. and Ho, L.C. (1995) Uptake and distribution of nutrients in relation
     to tomato fruit quality. Acta Horticulturae 412, 375–387. doi: 10.17660/
     ActaHortic.1995.412.45.
Albregts, E.E. and Howard, C.M. (1985) Effect of intermittent sprinkler irrigation on
     establishment of strawberry transplants. Soil and Crop Science Society of Florida
     Proceedings 44, 197–199.
Andersen, P.C., Rhoads, F.M., Olson, S.M. and Hill, K.D. (1999) Carbon and nitrogen
     budgets in spring and fall tomato crops. HortScience 34, 648–652.
Barker, A.V. and Pilbeam, D.J. (2007) Introduction. In: Barker, A.V. and Pilbeam, D.J.
     (eds) Handbook of Plant Nutrition. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 3–18.
Baselga-Yrisarry, J.J., Prieto-Losada, M.H. and Rodriguez del Rincon, A. (1993)
     Response of processing tomato to three different levels of water and nitrogen appli-
     cations. Acta Horticulturae 335, 149–156.
Bates, A.L., Orem, W.O., Harvey, J.W. and Spiker, E.C. (2002) Tracing sources of sulfur in
     the Florida Everglades. Journal of Environmental Quality 31, 287–299.
Beerling, E.A.M., Blok, C., Van der Maas, A.A. and Van Os, E.A. (2014) Closing the
     water and nutrient cycles in soilless cultivation systems. Acta Horticulturae 1034,
     49–55. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2014.1034.4.
204                        B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


Bengtsson, G., Bengtson, P. and Månsson, K.F. (2002) Gross nitrogen mineralization-,
     immobilization-, and nitrification rates as a function of soil C/N ratio and micro-
     bial activity. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 35, 143–154.
Besford, R.T. (1980) A rapid tissue test for diagnosing phosphorus deficiency in the
     ­tomato plant. Annals of Botany 45, 225–227.
Besford, R.T. and Maw, G.A. (1974) Uptake and distribution of potassium in tomato
      plants. Plant and Soil 41, 601–618.
Bruulsema, T., Lemunyon, J. and Herz, B. (2009) Know your fertilizer rights. Crops &
      Soils 42(2), 13–16.
Ceccotti, S.P., Morris, R.J. and Messick, D.L. (1998) A global overview of the sulphur
      situation: industry’s background, market trends, and commercial aspects of sul-
      phur fertilizers. In: Schnug, E. (ed.) Sulphur in Agroecosytems. Kluwer Academic,
      Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 175–202.
Debouba, M., Maâroufi-Dghimi, H., Suzuki, A., Ghorbel, M.H. and Gouiaj, H. (2007)
      Changes in growth and activity of enzymes involved in nitrate reduction and
      ­ammonium assimilation in tomato seedlings in response to NaCl stress. Annals of
       Botany 99(6), 1143–1151. doi:10.1093/aob/mcm050.
De Groot, C.C., Van den Boogaard, R., Marcelis, L.F.M., Harbinson, J. and Lambers, H.
       (2003) Contrasting effects of N and P deprivation on the regulation of photosyn-
       thesis in tomato plants in relation to feedback limitation. Journal of Experimental
       Botany 54, 1957–1967. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erg193.
Doorenbos, J. and Pruitt, W.O. (1977) Crop Water Requirements. Irrigation and Drainage,
       no. 24. United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome.
Dorais, M., Papadopoulos, A. and Gosselin, A. (2001) Influence of electric conduct-
       ivity management on greenhouse tomato yield and fruit quality. Agronomie 21,
       367–383.
Dukes, M.D., Zotarelli, L., Liu, G.D. and Simonne, E.H. (2012) Principles and prac-
       tices of irrigation management for vegetables. In: Olson, S.M. and Santos, B.M.
       (eds) 2012–2013 Vegetable Production Handbook for Florida. Institute of Food and
       Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, pp. 17–27.
Ehret, D.L. and Ho, L.C. (1986) The effects of salinity on dry matter partitioning and fruit
       growth in tomatoes grown in nutrient film culture. Horticultural Science 61, 361–367.
Grisso, R., Alley, M., Wysor, W.G., Holshouser, D. and Thomason, W. (2009)
       Precision Farming Tools: Soil Electrical Conductivity. Publications and educa-
       tional resources, Virginia Cooperative Extension. Available at: https://pubs.ext.
       vt.edu/442/442-508/442-508.html (accessed 6 December 2016).
Guidi, L., Lorefice, G., Pardossi, A., Malorgio, F., Tognoni, F. and Soldatini, G.F.
       (1997) Growth and photosynthesis of Lycopersicon esculentum (L.) plants
       as affected by nitrogen deficiency. Biologia Plantarum 40(2), 235–244. doi:
       10.1023/A:1001068603778.
Halliday, D.J. and Trenkel, M.E. (eds) (1992) IFA World Fertilizer Use Manual. International
       Fertilizer Industry Association, Paris, pp. 289–290, 331–337.
Hao, X. and Papadopoulos, A.P. (2004) Effects of calcium and magnesium on plant
       growth, biomass partitioning, and fruit yield of winter greenhouse tomato.
       HortScience 39(3), 512–515.
Hochmuth, G. (1994) Plant Petiole Sap-Testing Guide for Vegetable Crops. Florida
       Cooperative Extension Service Circular No1144. IFAS, Gainesville, Florida.
                                  Irrigation and Fertilization                            205


Holder, R. and Christensen, M.H. (1989) The effect of electrical conductivity on the
    growth, yield and composition of cherry tomatoes grown on rockwool. In: Proceedings
    7th International Congress Soilless Culture, Flevohof, 1988. ISOSC, Wageningen,
    Netherlands, pp. 213–228.
Hosier, S. and Bradley, L. (1999) Guide to Symptoms of Plant Nutrient Deficiencies.
    AZ1106. University of Arizona Cooperative Extension, Tucson, Arizona.
Humphries, J.M., Stangoulis, J.C.R. and Graham, R.D. (2007) Manganese. In: Barker, A.V.
    and Pilbeam, D.J. (eds) Handbook of Plant Nutrition. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton,
    Florida, pp. 351–374.
IMCC (1984) Efficient Fertilizer Use: Fertilizing for Maximum Profit. International
    Minerals and Chemical Corporation, Mundelein, Illinois.
Jones, J.B. Jr (1999) Tomato Plant Culture: In the Field, Greenhouse, and Home Garden. CRC
    Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Kabu, K.L. and Toop, E.W. (1970) Influence of potassium-magnesium antagonism on
    tomato plant growth. Canadian Journal of Plant Science 58, 711–715.
Kaniszewski, S., Elkner, K. and Rumpel, J. (1987) Effect of nitrogen fertilization and irriga-
    tion on yield, nitrogen status in plant and quality of fruits of direct seeded tomatoes.
    Acta Horticulturae 200, 196–202.
Kirkby, E.A. and Mengel, K. (1966) Ionic balance in different tissues of the tomato plant
    in relation to nitrate, urea, or ammonium nutrition. Plant Physiology 42, 6–14.
Kirnak, H., Kaya, C., Tas, I. and Higgs, D. (2001) The influence of water deficit on vege-
    tative growth, physiology, fruit yield and quality in eggplants. Bulgarian Journal of
    Plant Physiology 27(3–4), 34–46.
Lohry, R. (2007) Micronutrients: Functions, Sources and Application Methods. Indiana
    CCA Conference Proceedings. Available at: https://www.agry.purdue.edu/
    CCA/2007/2007/Proceedings/Raun%20Lohry%20-%20CCA%20Proceedings_
    KLS.pdf (accessed 1 January 2017).
Maas, E.V. (1984) Crop tolerance. California Agriculture 38, 20–21.
Martinez, V. and Cerda, A. (1989) Influence of N source on rate of Cl, N, Na, and K uptake
    cucumber seedlings grow in saline conditions. Journal of Plant Nutrition 12, 971–983.
Maughan, T., Allen, L.N. and Drost, D. (2015) Soil Moisture Measurement and Sensors for
    Irrigation Management. Available at: http://extension.usu.edu/files/publications/
    publication/AG_Irrigation_2015-01pr.pdf (accessed 19 December 2016).
Maynard, D.N. and Hochmuth, G.J. (2007) Knott’s Handbook for Vegetable Growers, 5th
    edn. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, pp. 181, 203.
Mitchell, J.P., Shennan, C. and Grattan, S.R. (1991) Developmental changes in tomato
    fruit composition in response to water deficit and salinity. Physiologia Plantarum
    83, 177–185. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.1991.tb01299.x.
Moore, P.A., Daniel, T.C. and Edwards, D.R. (2000) Reducing phosphorus runoff and
    inhibiting ammonia loss from poultry manure with aluminum sulfate. Journal of
    Environmental Quality 29, 37–49.
Olson, S.M., Stall, W.M., Vallad, G.E., Webb, S.E., Smith, S.A. et al. (2012) Tomato pro-
    duction in Florida. In: Olson, S.M. and Santos, B.M. (eds) 2011–2012 Vegetable
    Production Handbook for Florida. Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences,
    University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, pp. 309–332.
OMAFRA (2001) Growing Greenhouse Vegetables. Publication 371. Ontario Ministry of
    Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Toronto, Canada.
206                        B.M. Santos and E.A. Torres-Quezada


OMAFRA (2003) Growing Greenhouse Vegetables, 2003 Supplement. Publication 371S.
     Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Toronto, Canada.
Phillips, S.B., Cemberato, J.J. and Leikam, D. (2009) Selecting the right fertilizer rate: a
     component of 4R nutrient stewardship. Crops and Soils 42, 14–17.
Reddy, K.R., Khaleel, R., Overcash, M.R. and Westerman, P.W. (1979) A nonpoint
     source model for land areas receiving animal wastes: II. Ammonia volatilization.
     Transactions of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers 22, 1398–1405.
Roberts, T.L. (2007) Right product, right rate, right time and right place: the foundation
     of best management practices for fertilizer. In: Fertilizer Best Management Practices.
     IFA, Paris, pp. 29–32.
Römheld, V. and Nikolic, M. (2007) Iron. In: Barker, A.V. and Pilbeam, D.J. (eds) Handbook
     of Plant Nutrition. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 329–350.
Roosta, H.R. (2011) Effects of foliar application of some macro- and micro-nutrients
     on tomato plants in aquaponic and hydroponic systems. Scientia Horticulturae 129,
     396–402.
Sainju, U.M., Singh, B.P. and Whitehead, W.F. (2001) Comparison of the effects of cover
     crops and nitrogen fertilization on tomato yield, root growth, and soil properties.
     Scientia Horticulturae 91, 201–214.
Sanchez, C.A. (2007) Phosphorus. In: Barker, A.V. and Pilbeam, D.J. (eds) Handbook of
     Plant Nutrition. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 51–90.
Sanders, D.C. (2004) Vegetable Crop Guidelines for the Southeastern US. North Carolina
     Vegetable Growers Association, Raleigh, North Carolina.
Seliga, J.P. and Shattuck, V.I. (1995) Crop rotation affects the yield and nitrogen fertil-
     ization response in processing tomatoes. Scientia Horticulturae 64, 159–166.
Snyder, C.S., Bruulsema, T.W. and Jensen, T.L. (2007) Best management practices to min-
     imize greenhouse gas emissions associated with fertilizer use. Better Crops 91, 16–18.
Sonneveld, C. and Voogt, W. (2009) Plant Nutrition of Greenhouse Crops. Springer,
     Dordrecht. doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-2532-6.
Stanghellini, C. (2014) Horticultural production in greenhouses: efficient use of water.
     Acta Horticulturae 1034, 25–32. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.2014.1034.1.
Stanghellini, C., Kempkes, F.L.K. and Knies, P. (2003) Enhancing environmental
     quality in agricultural systems. Acta Horticulturae 609, 277–283. doi: 10.17660/
     ActaHortic.2003.609.41.
Tanner, C.B., Peterson, A.E. and Love, J.R. (1960) Radiant energy exchange in a corn
     field. Agronomy Journal 52, 373–379.
Van Ieperen, W. (1996) Effects of different day and night salinity levels on vegetative
     growth, yield and quality of tomato. Journal of Horticultural Science 71, 99–111.
Van Ieperen, W. and Madery, H. (1994) A new method to measure plant water uptake
     and transpiration simultaneously. Journal of Experimental Botany 45, 51–60.
Van Iersel, M.W., Chappell, M. and Lea-Cox, J.D. (2013) Sensors for improved efficiency
     of irrigation in greenhouse and nursery production. HortTechnology 23, 735–746.
Wu, M. and Kubota, C. (2008) Effects of electrical conductivity of hydroponic nutrient
     solution on leaf gas exchange of five greenhouse tomato cultivars. HortTechnology
     18, 271–277.
