                                         7
          Crop Protection: Pest and Disease
                    Management
             Gary E. Vallad, Gerben Messelink and Hugh A. Smith




ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL IMPORTANCE OF TOMATO

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United
Nations (FAOSTAT database), nearly 177 million metric tons (t) of tomatoes
were produced globally from 4.8 million hectares in 2016, an average yield of
37 t of tomatoes for every hectare of land in production throughout the world.
The level of tomato production throughout the world demonstrates the cultural
importance of this New World vegetable (see also Chapter 1). The efficiency of
tomato production, represented here as the average yield of fruit per hectare
of land, varies greatly throughout the world, ranging from 1.5 t/ha for Somalia to
650 t/ha for greenhouses in The Netherlands. This vast discrepancy is further
illustrated by the fact that Somalia produces tomatoes on an estimated 11,200 ha
of open field production, compared with only 1750 ha of mostly greenhouse
production in The Netherlands (FAOSTAT database). It is logical to assume that
much of the discrepancy in production efficiency observed globally is directly
related to the level of key inputs that have become standard for modern agri-
culture, including infrastructure (irrigation systems and protected structures),
machinery, fertilizer and the assorted pesticides utilized for the management of
weeds, pests and diseases. It is paramount that food production keeps up with
global population growth; and an expanding middle-class population in many
developing areas of the world is likely to increase the demand for tomatoes.
In a society that is becoming more globally aware of limited environmental
resources, there is a need not only to improve production through increased
inputs in developing countries, but also to ensure that these inputs are properly
managed to maximize yields and quality while minimizing unwanted environ-
mental impacts.
     The goal of this chapter is to review pests and diseases important to global
tomato production, giving an update of basic and applied research on the man-
agement of some pests and diseases with some considerations for greenhouse
and open field production. Special emphasis is also placed on integrated pest
management and the biological control of key pests in greenhouse production.

© CAB International 2018. Tomatoes 2nd edition (E. Heuvelink)                207
208                              G.E. Vallad et al.



IPM AND BIOLOGICAL CONTROL CONCEPTS

To meet both the worldwide demand for food security and environmental safety,
agriculture must increase food production and quality while decreasing its eco-
logical footprint. Ensuring sustainability and competitiveness with reduced
pesticide inputs is a major challenge but this can be achieved by integrated pest
management (IPM). IPM is a sustainable approach to managing pests that com-
bines available biological, cultural, physical and chemical tactics to minimize
the economic, health and environmental risks associated with crop production.
Biological control of pests and diseases through the use of natural enemies such
as predators, parasitoids, pathogens and other antagonists to reduce pest dens-
ities and reduce disease can be an important component to any IPM system.


BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF PESTS

Several types of biological control can be distinguished. Classical biological
control refers to the introduction of natural enemies to a new area where they
did not originate or do not occur naturally. This is usually done by government
authorities. Augmentation biological control is the release of mass-reared nat-
ural enemies to obtain an immediate control of pests. This type of biological
control is a commercialized method, with natural enemies sold by professional
companies. Finally, biological control can be achieved through actions that
protect and stimulate the performance of naturally occurring natural enemies,
which is referred to as conservation biological control.
     IPM practices between field and greenhouse tomato crops are fundamen-
tally different. Augmentation biological control in greenhouse crops is much
better developed than in field crops for several reasons. Firstly, greenhouse
crops have a higher economic value with higher production levels, which
means that more money can be spent on control measures. Releases of natural
enemies in field crops are often considered to be too expensive. Secondly, the
number of pest species and diseases is often lower in greenhouse than in field
crops. Particularly in modern greenhouses in northern Europe, problems with
nematodes and several soil diseases are solved by growing plants on hydro-
ponics. Thirdly, natural enemies released in greenhouses are confined largely
to the crop under production, whereas those released in the field may disperse
to surrounding weeds or fields, thereby reducing or eliminating their effective-
ness. Fourthly, airborne diseases, such as Botrytis, can be minimized by climate
management in modern greenhouses. This reduces the need for spraying fun-
gicides and thereby interference of fungicides with natural enemies. Finally,
a major drive for switching to biological control in greenhouse tomatoes has
been the introduction of bumblebees for pollination. Using bumblebees is not
compatible with many insecticides, thus forcing growers to use non-chemical
pest control measures.
                   Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management             209


     Field-grown tomatoes benefit more from conservation biological control
than from augmentation biological control. Various techniques of habitat
modifications, such as flowering strips or mulching, can be applied to stimulate
natural enemies (Barbosa, 1998). Although augmentation biological control
is well developed in greenhouse crops, it might be enhanced by similar con-
servation tools that are applied in field crops for both released and naturally
occurring natural enemies. One example is the use of so-called ‘banker plants’
in greenhouses that support the reproduction of natural enemies by supplying
alternative prey or food (Huang et al., 2011). The system of biological control
strongly depends on the type of natural enemies used. These will be discussed
below.


Biological control with generalist predators in greenhouse crops

Biological control of pests can be achieved using specialist and generalist
natural enemies. For a long time, biological control was mainly focused on
specialist natural enemies, because they are well adapted to their prey (van
Lenteren and Woets, 1988). However, they often cannot persist in a crop when
prey are scarce or absent. Repeated introductions are usually needed to control
pests, which may involve problems with timing, costs and quality of the natural
enemies. In general, generalist predators establish better in crops by feeding
on alternative food sources and they can potentially control several pest spe-
cies. Inoculating crops with generalist predators allows them to quickly ­detect
and control pests that invade a crop, which benefits the resilience of cropping
systems against pests. A drawback of generalist predators can be their inter-
ference with other natural enemies. Yet, biological control programmes in
greenhouse crops are increasingly based on releases of generalist predators
and they ­appear to be successful (Messelink et al., 2012).
     Tomato plants are particularly suitable for generalist predatory bugs of
the family Miridae, mostly species of the genera Nesidiocoris, Dicyphus and
Macrolophus. These predators are zoophytophagous, which means that they
feed and survive both on plant sap and on prey. They feed on multiple pest spe-
cies such as whiteflies (Gerling et al., 2001), aphids (Alvarado et al., 1997),
thrips (Riudavets and Castañé, 1998), spider mites (Hansen et al., 1999)
(Fig. 7.1), leaf miners (Arnó et al., 2003) and lepidopteran species, including
Tuta absoluta (Urbeja et al., 2009) (Table 7.1). Moreover, they are well adapted
to the hairy tomato surfaces both morphologically (slim body, long slender legs,
elongated curved claws) and behaviourally (locomotion) (Voigt et al., 2007).
In the Mediterranean area, several species spontaneously invade tomato crops
and these invasions can be supported by offering suitable host plants in green-
house surroundings (Perdikis et al., 2011). Some of these species are mass
produced on a commercial scale. The most important species are currently
Nesidiocoris tenuis and Macrolophus pygmaeus (Rambur) (formerly identified
210                               G.E. Vallad et al.




                                                       Fig. 7.1. Two-spotted spider
                                                       mite adult and eggs on tomato.
                                                       (Photograph courtesy Hugh Smith.)


as Macrolophus caliginosus Wagner) (Fig. 7.2) (van Lenteren, 2012), and in
Canada Dicyphus hesperus has been released (Sanchez et al., 2003). These pred-
ators are usually released at the start of a cropping cycle and can even be intro-
duced on seedlings at plant nurseries (crop inoculation). Population ­increases
can be supported by applying alternative food sources, such as pollen or steril-
ized eggs of the flour moth Ephestia kuehniella (Vandekerkhove and De Clercq,
2010). One of the risks in using zoophytophagous predators is that high
densities in absence of prey may cause crop damage (Castañé et al., 2011).
However, such risks may be managed by supplying supplemental food sources
in the crop, such as sugars (Urbaneja-Bernat et al., 2012). By inoculating crops
with generalist mirid predators, supporting their development and managing
their behaviour, crops will increase in resilience against pests. This approach
appears to be more effective than releasing natural enemies as ‘biopesticides’ in
response to pest infestations. Nevertheless, additional releases of specialist nat-
ural enemies ­remain indispensable for effective biological control programmes.
The most important specialist natural enemies will be discussed below.


Biological control with specialist natural enemies in greenhouse crops

Plant-feeding mites
Spider mites (Tetranychus urticae Koch and T. evansi Baker and Pritchard), tomato
russet mite (Aculops lycopersici (Massee)) and broad mite (Polyphagotarsonemus
latus (Banks)) are pests of tomatoes. Spider mites are larger (0.3–0.5 mm) than
russet mites (0.15–0.2 mm) and broad mites (females 0.2–0.3, males half as
large), which can only be seen with at least 14× magnification. Mites have
piercing–sucking mouthparts and puncture plant cells to extract sap. They es-
tablish on the undersides of leaves but can be found on all plant surfaces when
infestations are high. Spider mites produce webbing and chlorotic abraded
patches on leaves where they feed in high numbers. Russet mite feeding pro-
duces a silvery chlorotic appearance to the upper surface of tomato leaves.
Table 7.1.   Pests and their commercially available natural enemies in greenhouse tomatoes.

Pest group           Pest species                  Natural enemy

Plant-feeding mites Two-spotted spider mite        Specialist predatory mite Phytoseiulus persimilis, predatory midge Feltiella acarisuga
                    Tetranychus urticae            Generalist predators Macrolophus pygmaeus and Nesidiocoris tenuis
                    Red spider mite                Phytoseiulus longipes
                    Tetranychus evansi
                    Tomato russet mite             Limited effect of generalist phytoseiid mites




                                                                                                                                            Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management
                    Aculops lycopersici
                    Broadmite                      Limited effect of generalist phytoseiid mites
                    Polyphagotarsonemus latus
Aphids              Potato aphid                   Parasitoids Aphidius ervi and Aphelinus abdominalis
                    Macrosiphum euphorbiae
                    Foxglove aphid                 Parasitoids A. ervi and A. abdominalis
                    Aulacorthum solani
                    Peach aphid                    Parasitoid Aphidius matricariae, Aphidius colemani and A. ervi
                    Myzus persicae
                    All species                    Predatory midge Aphidoletes aphidimyza, generalist predators M. pygmaeus and
                                                     N. tenuis
Psyllids             Tomato/potato psyllid         Predatory beetle Delphastus catalinae
                     Bactericera cockerelli
Whiteflies           Tobacco or silverleaf whitefly Parasitoids Eretmocerus eremicus and Eretmocerus mundus, generalist predators
                     Bemisia tabaci                   M. pygmaeus and N. tenuis
                     Greenhouse whitefly            Parasitoids Encarsia formosa and E. eremicus, generalist predators M. pygmaeus and
                     Trialeurodes vaporariorum        N. tenuis
Mealybugs            Greenhouse mealy bug           No effective natural enemies available, limited use of predatory beetle
                     Pseudococcus viburni             Cryptolaemus montrouzieri
                                                                                                                             Continued
                                                                                                                                            211
                                                                                                                      212


Table 7.1.     Continued.

Pest group            Pest species                 Natural enemy

                      Other species:               No effective natural enemies available
                      Phenacoccus madeirensis,
                         Phenacoccus solenopsis,
                         Phenacoccus solani
Leaf miners           Tomato leaf miner            Parasitoids Diglyphus isae and
                      Liriomyza bryoniae           Dacnusa sibirica, generalist predators M. pygmaeus and N. tenuis




                                                                                                                      G.E. Vallad et al.
Caterpillars          Tomato leaf miner moth       Egg parasitoid Trichogramma achaeae (limited use)
                      Tuta absoluta
                      Tomato hawk moth             Egg parasitoid Trichogramma evanescens (limited use)
                      Lacanobia oleracea
                      Tomato looper                Egg parasitoid T. evanescens (limited use)
                      Chrysodeixis chalcites
                      Cabbage looper               Larval parasitoids are effective, but not mass-produced
                      Trichoplusia ni
                      All                          Generalist predators M. pygmaeus and N. tenuis
Thrips                Several species but mainly   Generalist predators M. pygmaeus and N. tenuis
                         western flower thrips
                      Frankliniella occidentalis
Plant damaging        Southern green stink bug     No natural enemies available
  bugs                Nezara viridula
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management              213




                                                  Fig. 7.2. Macrolophus pygmgeus,
                                                  whitefly predator. (Photograph:
                                                  Gerben Messelink.)

Broad mite causes bronzing of the underside of tomato leaves and terminal
shoots. Tomato russet mite feeds primarily on solanaceous plants but spider
mites and broad mite have a broad host range. Under favourable conditions
(24–27°C), tomato russet mite and broad mite can complete their life cycle in
about 1 week. The life cycle of spider mites is longer, though they can complete
their development in about 1 week at 30°C.
      Biological control of spider mites with the specialist predatory mite
Phytoseiulus persimilis is one of the cornerstones of biological control in green-
house crops (Hussey and Bravenboer, 1971). Spider mites in tomato can also
be controlled effectively by this predator but it does not perform as well as in
other crops. The reason is that it is hampered not only by entrapment in the
sticky exudates of glandular trichomes, but also indirectly by the secondary
plant metabolites in its prey (Koller et al., 2007). Predators that are reared on
tomato get better adapted to these plant traits and perform better than pred-
ators reared on bean (Drukker et al., 1997). Commercial producers of natural
enemies have adopted this knowledge and nowadays sell special tomato strains
of P. persimilis.
      A related species of T. urticae damaging tomato is Tetranychus evansi. This
mite is common in Africa and South America but crop infestations have been
observed in southern Europe and North America as well. This species seemed
to be a real threat, because P. persimilis is not able to deal with the dense web-
bing this spider mite produces and therefore is not able to control this pest. The
related predatory mite Phytoseiulus longipes seems to be more adapted to this
prey and is able to control this mite on tomato plants (Furtado et al., 2007).
      Biological control of the much smaller tomato russet mite Aculops lycoper-
sici and the broad mite Polyphagotarsonemus latus is not well developed. Several
species of phytoseiid mites are excellent predators of broad mites in other crops
(e.g. sweet pepper) (van Maanen et al., 2010) and leaf disc experiments show
that several predatory mites can prey on russet mites (Brodeur et al., 1997).
However, none of these mites so far performs well on tomato plants, probably
because they are strongly hampered by the glandular trichomes. An inter-
esting plant response to russet mites is the local degradation of these glandular
hairs. Once these trichomes are shrivelled, it appears that predatory mites are
214                                G.E. Vallad et al.


able to control the russet mite (van Houten et al., 2013). This indicates that a
locally applied ‘overkill’ of predatory mites may suppress russet mite densities
but they may not be able to prevent plant infestations as they do not establish
on tomato plants.

Whiteflies
The primary whitefly pests of tomato are Bemisia tabaci, Gennadius biotype B
(also known as the silverleaf, sweetpotato or tobacco whitefly, and sometimes
referred to in the literature as Bemisia argentifolii Bellows and Perring) and
Trialeurodes vaporariorum Westwood, the greenhouse or glasshouse whitefly.
       Whitefly adults are small (1.0–1.3 mm) insects with waxy white wings, a
yellow body and red eyes. Whitefly females typically lay eggs on the underside
of the leaf and usually lay between 100 and 300 eggs during the 3–6 weeks
that they are alive (Thompson, 2011). Eggs are oblong and attached to the
leaf surface on the basal end. Eggs are pearly or greenish white when first ovi-
posited and darken to a coffee colour. Whiteflies pass through four nymphal
­instars prior to becoming an adult. The first instar crawler possesses six legs and
 searches for a feeding site after emerging from the egg. Subsequent nymphal in-
 stars lack legs and are immobile. Whitefly nymphs are oval in shape, yellowish
 and translucent. The red eyes of the pharate adult are visible in the latter stage
 of the fourth instar. This is referred to as the red-eyed nymph or pupa, although
 technically, as hemimetabolous insects, whiteflies do not possess a pupal stage.
       B. tabaci and T. vaporariorum can be distinguished from each other in the
 adult stage by the manner in which they hold their wings. B. tabaci holds the
 wings ‘roof-like’ over the body, and with sufficient magnification the yellow
 abdomen can be seen between the wings from above. T. vaporariorum holds the
 wings ‘fan-like’ over the body, and the abdomen is not visible from above. The
 fourth instar nymph is also easily distinguished between the two species and
 is the stage commonly used to identify whitefly species. The fourth instar of
 T. vaporariorum has a marginal fringe of waxy rods where the dorsal and lateral
 surfaces meet. By contrast, the fourth instar of B. tabaci is largely flush with the
 surface of the leaf and has few marginal setae.
       The developmental time for egg to adult on tomato at 25°C is 20.5 days
 for B. tabaci (Yang and Chi, 2006) and 21 days for T. vaporariorum (Dorsman
 and van de Vrie, 1987). B. tabaci is a pest of field-grown tomato in warmer
 regions. T. vaporariorum is a problem in protected agriculture in temperate
 regions, in field and protected production under Mediterranean conditions,
 and in the tropics at higher elevations. In the tropics, B. tabaci is common up
 to about 1000 m above sea level and T. vaporariorum predominates at 800 m
 above sea level and in growing areas at greater elevations (Caballero, 1996).
 In some regions, both species are present on tomato (Dovas et al., 2002; Arnó
 et al., 2006).
       Whiteflies have a piercing–sucking stylet and are phloem feeders. When
 high numbers of whitefly feed on a plant, loss of phloem sap can debilitate
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                   215


the plant. Whiteflies produce honeydew, a sugar-rich excretion that accumu-
lates on the surface of leaves and provides a substrate for sooty moulds. Sooty
moulds are Ascomycete fungi that contaminate crops, reducing photosyn-
thesis and quality. Whiteflies primarily reduce yield in tomato by transmitting
viruses. B. tabaci can transmit several types of viruses but the most damaging
viruses transmitted by B. tabaci to tomato are in the genus Begomovirus (Family
Geminiviridae) (Lapidot and Polston, 2010). There are over 80 recognized
whitefly-transmitted geminiviruses of tomato (Varma et al., 2011). Tomato
yellow leaf curl disease is associated with several viruses that produce indistin-
guishable symptoms: stunting, small distorted yellow leaves, upward curling.
Globally, Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) is the most important. The virus
can be acquired by both immature and adult whiteflies and is transmitted
in a persistent circulative manner. That is, the whitefly acquires the virus by
feeding, can transmit the virus after a latent period of 8–24 hours and may
retain the virus for life (Cohen and Nitzany, 1966). Whiteflies also induce the
systemic disorder known as irregular ripening, which is caused by feeding of
nymphal B. tabaci (Schuster, 2001).
     Resistant varieties are available for management of TYLCV (Fig. 7.3).
Producers of field tomatoes rely primarily on chemical control, applying both
systemic and contact materials to manage adults and nymphs. T. vaporario-
rum is a vector of Tomato infectious chlorosis virus (Closteroviridae) but is less
­important as a virus vector in tomato than B. tabaci. Reflective plastic mulches




Fig. 7.3. TYLCV-susceptible tomato variety (left) next to TYLCV-tolerant variety
under high virus conditions. (Photograph courtesy Hugh Smith.)
216                              G.E. Vallad et al.


are used to reduce whitefly infestations early in the season (Csizinsky et al.
1997, 1999). Important sources of TYLCV and other whitefly-transmitted
­viruses include crop residues, asymptomic hosts such as pepper and resistant
 varieties, and certain weeds. Crop hygiene, particularly the destruction of old
 crop residues, is an important control measure for reducing viral inoculum.
       Biological control of the greenhouse whitefly T. vaporariorum in green-
 houses started in the UK with the parasitoid Encarsia formosa Gahan (Speyer,
 1927) and this wasp is still of major importance in biological control pro-
 grammes in greenhouse crops (van Lenteren, 2012). Females prefer to lay
 eggs in the third and fourth instar larvae of whiteflies. Parasitized greenhouse
 whiteflies can easily be recognized by pupae that have turned black. The related
 parasitoid Eretmocerus mundus is more effective in the control of B. tabaci and
 Eretmocerus eremicus can be used against both whitefly species (Greenberg et al.,
 2002) (Table 7.1). Low greenhouse temperatures (driven by energy saving)
 can restrict the efficacy of these wasps. Trimming of older leaves before adult
 wasps have emerged from parasitized whitefly pupae may hamper their popu-
 lation increases. To promote the survival of parasitoid populations, an adapted
 leaf trimming strategy is now advised. Biological control of whiteflies has been
 very successful in other crops such as cucumber and sweet pepper (Messelink
 et al., 2008; Calvo et al., 2009). However, as mentioned before, predatory mites
 so far do not perform well on tomato, because they can get trapped in the sticky
 hairs on the stems on tomato. Thus in practice, whitefly control is mainly based
 on a combination of mirid bugs and parasitoids.

Aphids
Aphids are small soft-bodied, pear-shaped insects with piercing–sucking
mouthparts. They are phloem feeders. They possess two small tube-like struc-
tures, called cornicles, on the fifth or sixth abdominal segments. In temperate
regions, aphids pass through an egg stage and four to five nymphal stages be-
fore becoming an adult. In warm regions and in protected structures, aphids
tend to be parthenogenetic and viviparous, that is, they reproduce without
mating and give birth to nymphs rather than eggs. These adaptations enable
aphid populations to grow rapidly. Aphid adults may be winged or wingless,
depending on environmental conditions. The most important species in both
field and greenhouse production are the potato aphid Macrosiphum euphorbiae
(Thomas), the foxglove aphid Aulacorthum solani (Kaltenbach), the green peach
aphid Myzus persicae (Sulzer) and the cotton or melon aphid Aphis gossypii
Glover. Each of these pests has a broad host range. M. persicae and A. gossypii
adults tend to be smaller (1.8 mm) than M. euphorbiae and A. solani (3.0 mm).
M. euphorbiae has both green and pink biotypes attacking tomato, but colour
can be variable within aphid species. Other characteristics are more useful for
identification, which requires magnification (Blackman and Eastop, 2000).
Aphids in greenhouses are more problematic in temperate climates than in
subtropical climates where temperatures are probably too high for many
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                217


 ­species. Aphid infestations tend to initiate on the underside of upper canopy
  tomato leaves, but under favourable conditions aphids can be found on most
  plant parts. They debilitate the plant by extracting sap in high amounts, produ-
  cing honeydew and sooty mould. Aphid feeding can produce wilting, necrotic
  spots on leaves and leaf distortion. Aphids vector damaging viruses to tomato,
  including Tobacco etch virus, Potato Y virus and Cucumber mosaic virus. Control
 of aphids in the field involves the use of insecticides, reflective plastic mulches
 and crop hygiene. There are presently few options for managing aphid-­vectored
viruses with resistant tomato varieties.
      In greenhouses, aphids can be controlled by specialist parasitoids of the
genera Aphidius and Aphelinus (Table 7.1). The most important parasitoid that
is able to parasitize all aphid species in tomato is Aphidius ervi. However, the
efficacy of parasitoids can by strongly disrupted by hyperparasitoids, which
are secondary parasitoids that can develop on primary parasitoids. Aphids can
additionally be controlled by the specialist gall midge Aphidoletes aphidimyza.
The larvae of this midge are impressive predators of all kinds of aphids. It is
quite common for natural enemies of aphids to enter greenhouses during
summer. Naturally occurring enemies such as parasitoids, chrysopids and
­syrphids can contribute significantly to the control of aphids.

Thrips
Species of thrips attacking tomato around the world are primarily in the
family Thripidae and include the western flower thrips Frankliniella occidentalis
(Pergande), tobacco thrips F. fusca (Hinds), flower thrips F. tritici (Fitch) and
F. schultzei (Trybom). These species are found primarily in the flower, although
feeding damage to foliage (Fig. 7.4) and oviposition damage on fruit are common
at high thrips densities. The onion thrips Thrips tabaci (Lindeman), the green-
house thrips Heliothrips hemorrhoidalis (Bouché), the chilli thrips Scirtothrips
dorsalis Hood and Echinothrips americanus Morgan also attack foliage. Thrips
are small insects and possess fringed wings as adults. Adult western flower
thrips measure 1.2–1.9 mm. Most thrips found on tomato range in colour




                                                  Fig. 7.4. Thrips feeding damage
                                                  on tomato leaf. (Photograph
                                                  courtesy Hugh Smith.)
218                               G.E. Vallad et al.


from pale yellowish or orange-brown to dark brown. Thrips females insert eggs
partially into plant tissue. Thrips attacking tomato pass through two larval
stages, a pre-pupal stage and a pupal stage. The two pupal stages are mobile
but do not feed. Pupation usually occurs in the soil. Thrips have asymmetrical
mouthparts that pierce and extract plant juices from outer cells. Thrips feeding
abrades the surface of leaves and flowers, and scarred tissue eventually turns
brown and dry. Thrips often leave small blackish-green faecal pellets in feeding
areas. Oviposition on tomato fruit results in stippling and haloing on the fruit
surface. In addition to direct damage to the fruit, thrips cause crop losses in
tomato by vectoring viruses in the Tospoviridae, including Tomato spotted wilt
virus and Ground nut ring spot virus. Tomato spotted wilt is acquired by the lar-
vae but is transmitted by adults feeding on foliage. Several varieties of tomato
resistant to Tomato spotted wilt virus are available. Flower thrips, particularly
western flower thrips, are very difficult to manage using insecticides, in part
because of the rapid development of resistance.

Tomato psyllid
The tomato psyllid, Bactericera (Paratrioza) cockerelli (Šulc), is a pest of tomato
and other solanaceous crops, including aubergine, potato and pepper. Adults
are 2.5–2.75 mm in length with transparent wings held roof-like over the
body. Newly emerged adults are amber in colour and turn dark brown or black
with a banded appearance over time. Eggs are oval and attached by a thin stalk
to the leaf. Eggs are oviposited on both upper and lower leaf surfaces and on
apical leaves. Nymphs are elliptical and flat. They are usually found on lower
leaf surfaces and tend not to move. First instar nymphs are yellowish-orange
and subsequent instars tend to be yellowish-green. Nymphs and adults feed
on phloem with piercing–sucking mouthparts and produce large amounts of
whitish granular excrement containing honeydew and wax. Tomato psyllid is
responsible for a physiological disorder known as ‘psyllid yellows’, which can
significantly reduce yields. Psyllid yellows produces an array of symptoms in
affected tomato plants, including reduced growth, chlorotic, reddish and purp-
lish discoloration of leaves, upward cupping of leaves, shortened swollen inter-
nodes and premature plant decline. The tomato psyllid vectors the bacterial
pathogen Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum, also known as Ca. L. psyllau-
rous, which causes stunting and reduced yields in tomato. The tomato psyllid is
adapted best to temperatures in the range of 21–27° C. At 23°C, tomato psyllid
needs approximately 27 days to develop from the egg stage to the adult stage,
passing through five nymphal instars. Egg hatch is suppressed at temperatures
above 32°C (List, 1939). The tomato psyllid is found in North America west of
the Mississippi, in southern parts of Canada and in Mexico, Central America
and New Zealand.
     Insecticides representing several modes of action are used to manage the
tomato psyllid and suppress transmission of C. Liberibacter solanacearum
(Butler and Trumble, 2012). Management of alternative hosts such as
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management               219


­solanaceous weeds aids in the suppression of the pest. Natural enemies of
 B. cockerelli include predators of soft-bodied insects such as ladybird beetles
 and lacewings; the parasitoids Tamarixia triozae (Burks) (Eulophidae) and
 Metaphycus psyllidis Compere (Encyrtidae); and entomopathogens including
 Beauvaria bassiana (Balsamo), Isaria fumosorosea (Wize), Metarhizium anisopliae
 (Metschnikoff) and Verticillium lecanii (Zimmerman).

Leafminers
The leaf miner species attacking tomato are Liriomyza bryoniae (Kaltenbach),
L. huidobrensis (Blanchard), L. sativae Blanchard and L. trifolii (Burgess)
(Diptera: Agromyzidae). Leaf miner adults are small (approximately 2 mm)
flies with black and yellow markings. Females oviposit eggs into the surface
of the leaf. L. huidobrensis typically oviposits on the underside of the leaf, and
larvae mine near the central or lateral leaf veins. The other species tend to ovi-
posit on the upper surface of the leaf and larval mines do not follow a specific
pattern. The three larval instars feed on mesophyll tissue between the upper
and lower plant surfaces, exiting the leaf and dropping to the soil to pupate. In
warm weather, each species needs about 2 weeks to develop from egg to adult
on tomato. In addition to the damage caused by leaf mines, females cause ‘stip-
pling’ damage by puncturing holes in leaves with their ovipositor to feed on
plant juices. Selective insecticides can be used to manage leaf miners. However,
the use of broad spectrum insecticides tends to make leaf miner infestations
worse by suppressing the parasitic Hymenoptera that naturally keep leaf
miners in check.
     The tomato leaf miner L. bryoniae is the dominant leaf miner species in
greenhouses. The parasitoids Dacnusa sibirica and Diglyphus isaea are two larval
parasitoids applied worldwide for biological control of several species of leaf
miners (van Lenteren, 2012). D. sibirica is most effective in the early season,
while D. isaea provides control during the summer (Minkenberg, 1990).
Additional control can be achieved by naturally occurring parasitoids, such
as Opius pallipes.

Caterpillars
Tomato is attacked by many types of caterpillar from the seedling stage
until harvest. Cutworms such as Peridroma saucia (Hübner) and Agrotis ipsi-
lon (Hufnagel) attack seedlings at the soil level and are most active at night.
Poisoned baits, the reduction of crop residues and weed suppression around
the edges of the field contribute to the suppression of cutworms. Feeding
by loopers is usually confined to foliage. Loopers attacking tomato include
Autographa californica (Speyer), Chrysodeixis chalcites (Esper), Pseudopludia
includens (Walker) and Trichoplusia ni (Hübner). Loopers can generally be con-
trolled using insecticides, including Bacillus thuringiensis products that are
compatible with biological control. Some loopers serve as alternative hosts for
parasitoids such as Hypersoter exiguae (Viereck) that attack caterpillars ­directly
220                               G.E. Vallad et al.




                                                       Fig. 7.5. Spodoptera eridania
                                                       (lower right) and damaged
                                                       ­tomato. (Photograph courtesy
                                                        Hugh Smith.)


damaging fruit. Many species of Spodoptera (armyworms) attack tomato
­foliage and will in some instances attack green or ripened fruit. These include
 Spodoptera exigua (Hübner), S. littoralis Boisd., S. eridania (Cramer) (Fig. 7.5),
 S. ornithogalli (Guenée) and S. frugiperda (J. E. Smith). Armyworms lay their
 eggs in masses on the undersides of leaves, usually covered with a fuzzy layer
 of scales. Insecticides representing several modes of action are available to sup-
 press armyworms, which are more easily managed in early instars than in later
 stages. Most caterpillar species are attacked by a range of predators and para-
 sitoids in the egg, larval and pupal stages. The tomato hornworm, Manduca
 quinquemaculata (Haworth), and the tobacco hornworm, M. sexta (Linnaeus),
 are often suppressed by natural enemies.
       The most threatening and damaging caterpillar is the leaf miner moth,
 Tuta absoluta. As discussed above, biological control with generalist mirid
 bugs has been very successful in the Mediterranean area. Specialist natural
 ­enemies can, if necessary, be added to the control measures against this pest.
  A commonly used species is the egg parasitoid Trichogramma achaeae (Desneux
  et al., 2010). Other Trichogramma species can be used against noctuid moth
  pests (Table 7.1) but they are only applied on a small scale. Most caterpillars
  are controlled by sprayings with biopesticides based on Bacillus thuringiensis.
  Additional control can be achieved by birds that enter greenhouses in summer.

Stink bugs and leaf-footed bugs
Stink bugs and leaf-footed bugs are hemimetabolous insects that pass through
an egg stage and five nymphal instars before becoming an adult. These ­insects
have piercing–sucking mouthparts. Both nymphs and adults can feed on
­foliage, stems and blossoms of tomato but the most serious damage they ­inflict
 is on fruit. Stink bug damage on tomato fruits produces a small point sur-
 rounded by a lighter patch that either becomes yellow or remains green as the
 fruit ripens. Stink bug feeding can produce white thickened tissue inside the
 fruit. Feeding by leaf-footed bugs produces malformed, discoloured fruits. Stink
 bugs attacking tomato include the southern green stink bug, Nezara viridula
                     Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                221


(Linnaeus), the brown stink bug, Euschistus servis (Say), and the consperse stink
bug Chlorochroa sayi (Stål) (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae). Stink bugs have similar
life histories (Capinera, 2001). The southern green stink bug is a cosmopol-
itan pest with a broad host range that prefers crucifers and leguminous crops,
including cover crops such as Sesbania and Indigofera spp. The optimal tem-
perature for N. viridula’s development is approximately 30°C; it needs about
35 days to develop from egg to adult during warm months. Females lay pale
or pinkish-yellow barrel-shaped eggs in hexagonal clusters. Colour changes
and colour patterns on nymphal N. viridula are complex (Capinera, 2001). The
adults are green and shield-shaped.
      Leaf-footed bugs attacking tomato include Leptoglossus phyllopus (Linnaeus)
and Phthia picta (Drury) (Hemiptera: Coreidae). Females oviposit oval metallic
brown eggs in rows on leaves or stems. Nymphs range in colour from orange
to reddish brown. Adults are about 20 mm long and brown. L. phyllopus has a
white band across the wing covers and has flattened tibia. Other hemipteran
pests that cause sucking damage to tomato fruit include Lygus spp. and the
­tomato bug, Cyrtopeltis modesta (Distant) (Miridae).
      Weeds, particularly solanaceous and leguminous weeds, can serve as alterna-
 tive hosts for stink bugs and leaf-footed bugs attacking tomato and can be important
 sources of infestation. Stink bugs are attacked by a range of natural enemies,
 including scelionid and eupelmid egg parasitoids and tachinids that parasitize late
 nymphal instars and adults. Predators attacking stink bugs include Geocoris spp.
 (big-eyed bugs), nabid damsel bugs, predatory stink bugs (Pentatomidae), green
 lacewings (Chrysopidae), fire ants (Solenopsis invicta Buren) and birds.


ECONOMICALLY IMPORTANT DISEASES OF TOMATO

A disease can be broadly defined as any departure from normal growth.
Tomatoes are afflicted by a broad array of diseases caused by parasitic nema-
todes, fungi, oomycetes, bacteria, viruses and viroids. Although often referred
to as diseases, any disorder caused by a physiological (see Chapter 5 for fruit
physiological disorders) or genetic abnormality related to environment or
­nutrition (see Chapter 6 for nutritional disorders) will not be covered here.
       Disease management requires knowledge of the pathogen’s life cycle and
 an understanding of those environmental factors that govern pathogen inter-
 action with the host. In plant pathology, the concept of the disease triangle
 is often used to describe the three factors necessary for disease development:
 (i) a susceptible host plant; (ii) a virulent pathogen; and (iii) adequate environ-
 mental conditions for infection and growth of the pathogen. Disease manage-
 ment utilizes tactics to disrupt the interaction between the host and pathogen,
 and the environment to prevent or slow disease development.
       The most logical disease management tactics for tomato production are
 those that eradicate or exclude the pathogen from the environment, avoid
222                                G.E. Vallad et al.


­production in those areas where the pathogen exists, or avoid production
 when the environmental conditions are most favourable for disease develop-
 ment. Sanitation should be the base of any integrated disease management
 strategy. Most pathogens of tomato are able to survive in the residues of crops,
 related weed species and on volunteer plants, creating a bridge from one pro-
 duction cycle to the next. Cultural practices that ensure the timely destruction
 of plant residues and sanitization of pots, tools and other production surfaces
 and i­mplements used during tomato production will limit the carry-over of
 pathogens from one crop to the next. A number of tomato pathogens are also
 seed-borne or can lie as a latent infection without any apparent symptoms pre-
 sent in i­nfected tissues until conditions become more favourable for growth
 and disease development. As such, testing or screening of tomato seed, trans-
 plants or grafted materials can greatly limit the introduction of pathogens into
 the production environment, especially for greenhouse production.
       Genetic resistance to a number of important pathogens is available in to-
 mato (see Chapter 2), which provides the most efficient and economical means
 for managing many diseases. Resistance is usually limited to a specific portion
 of the pathogen population, referred to as a race, which can limit usefulness
 in some production areas as the deployment of resistance often leads to the
 s­election of virulent isolates within the pathogen population over time. In
  addition, many resistance traits are introduced from wild tomato relatives,
  which during the breeding process can also introduce other genetic factors
  that can have an undesirable effect on important horticultural traits such as
  plant architecture, yield or fruit quality – a process known as linkage drag.
  These undesirable traits often discourage broader commercial adoption of cer-
  tain resistance traits. While great gains have been made with the development
  of resistant tomato varieties through traditional breeding methods, the avail-
  ability of genome sequence for the conventional tomato (The Tomato Genome
  Consortium, 2012) and wild Solanum species (Labate et al., 2014; The 100
  Tomato Genome Sequencing Consortium, 2014) have given tomato breeders
  access to a whole new arsenal of molecular tools, such as genotype by sequen-
  cing (GBS) (Poland and Rife, 2012), that will not only accelerate the develop-
  ment of varieties with improved resistance but will also help limit linkage drag.
  The advent of several genome-editing strategies, such as clustered regularly
  interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) (Brooks et al., 2014), as well
  as classic plant transformation strategies, could potentially allow for the tar-
  geted disruption of genes that confer susceptibility (Li et al., 2012) or the intro-
  duction of resistance genes from other plant genera (Horvath et al., 2012).
       Tomato is truly a global crop (see Chapter 1), playing an important role in
  the diets of millions. With an ever increasing global demand comes an increase
  in the movement of plant materials in the form of seed and fruit, aiding in the
  spread of numerous tomato diseases throughout the world. In addition, increased
  market demand and reduced availability of arable land throughout the world
  has increased production in protected structures, such as greenhouses. This
                     Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                 223


review will cover common diseases of importance to the worldwide production
of tomatoes. Each disease will be accompanied by a brief description of symp-
toms, the biology of the causal agent and some reference to control measures.


COMMON FOLIAR DISEASES OF TOMATO

Anthracnose

Anthracnose is a fungal disease caused by several species of the genus
Colletotrichum, to include C. coccodes (Wallr.) Hughes, C. gloeosporioides (Penz.)
Sacc. and C. dematium (Pers. Ex Fr.) Grove (Baxter et al., 1985). Spores of the
fungus survive on plant debris and are easily splashed to lower tomato foliage
by rain. Foliar symptoms are fairly inconspicuous, consisting of small round
necrotic lesions surrounded by a faint yellow chlorotic halo, but do develop a
target-like appearance as they expand, similar to other common foliar fungal
diseases. Symptoms of anthracnose are most commonly associated with
ripening tomato fruit, beginning as small water-soaked lesions that gradually
enlarge, becoming sunken and remaining water soaked beneath the surface as
the fruit ripens. Fruits often develop cracks within the lesions leading to sec-
ondary infections by soft rot bacteria, such as Erwinia spp., leading to rapid
fruit decay. Eventually, specialized fungal structures known as acervuli ­develop,
causing the centre of the lesion to turn black. Moisture causes spores (conidia)
to be discharged in a pink gelatinous mass from acervuli, allowing splash dis-
persal of spores to other fruits and foliage. One species, C. coccodes, also infects
roots, causing brown lesions and root rot in which the fungus can produce
copious quantities of microsclerotia; this disease is known as black dot root
rot (Dillard and Cobb, 1998). The fungus can survive in the soil as acervuli or
microsclerotia embedded in plant tissues (Blakeman and Hornby, 1966; Farley,
1976). Anthracnose is primarily managed through the timely destruction of
plant debris at the end of season to prevent carry-over of inoculum, avoiding
rotations with other solanaceous crops, with a 2–3-year rotation between so-
lanaceous crops, avoiding fields with poor drainage, proper plant spacing to
promote airflow in the canopy, and making preventive fungicide applications
after fruit set when conditions are conducive for the disease. Disease develop-
ment is favoured by temperatures above 18°C and periods of extended leaf
­wetness of 6 h or more (Dillard, 1989).


Bacterial spot

Bacterial spot of tomato is caused by a diverse genetic group of pathogenic
bacteria representing four distinct species, Xanthomonas vesicatoria, X. euvesica-
toria, X. perforans and X. gardneri (Jones et al., 2004; Potnis et al. 2015), that are
224                                 G.E. Vallad et al.


a major problem wherever tomatoes are grown. The distribution of these bac-
teria varies throughout the world. However, outbreaks of exotic xanthomonads
have been identified in recent years in several major tomato/pepper-producing
regions in the western hemisphere (Jones et al., 2005). X. gardneri has become
a significant problem in Brazil (Quezado-Duval et al., 2004) and Canada, and
more recently throughout Midwestern production areas of the USA (Ma et al.,
2011). Several physiological races of bacterial spot have been identified, mostly
associated with the various species, with race 1 corresponding to X. euvesicato-
ria, race 2 to X. vesicatoria, and races 3, 4 and 5 to X. perforans (Stall et al., 2009).
       Bacterial spot is most problematic during warm, humid weather and is
often initiated by episodes of wind-driven rain. On the leaf, infection begins
when the bacterium enters the plant through natural openings and wounds,
where it multiplies within plant tissues. Within 3–4 days, initial symptoms
of water-soaked lesions are typically observed on lower leaf surfaces. If ideal
­environmental conditions persist, lesions enlarge and coalesce, causing exten-
 sive leaf chlorosis and defoliation. Once established, the disease can still cause
 significant losses even in the absence of rain. Under conditions of high rela-
 tive humidity such as a heavy dew or fog, the disease can spread around the
 leaf margin (presumably by the infection of hydathodes) and cause a general
 blighting that can again lead to premature leaf drop even when only moderate
 disease pressure exists. All above-ground plant tissues are susceptible to the
 disease. Fruit lesions are particularly problematic for growers, since they not
 only detract from the appearance of the fruit but also offer a site for other mi-
 crobes to enter the fruit; both scenarios impact the marketability of the fruit.
 Fruit lesions begin as small raised blisters on the fruit surface that are a lighter
 green than the rest of the fruit. As the lesions enlarge, they turn brown to black
 and develop a layer of scab-like tissue.
       Disease is managed by avoiding successive crops in the same field, using
 clean seed, producing disease-free transplants and keeping fields free of weeds
 and volunteer tomatoes. Disease management in transplant and field produc-
 tion has relied heavily on the use of copper-based fungicides, which has led
 to the establishment of copper-tolerant strains in many areas of the world
 (Ritchie and Dittapongpitch, 1991; Martin et al., 2004). The use of bacterio-
 phages, certain rhizobacteria and chemical elicitors of systemic acquired
 ­resistance have shown efficacy in managing bacterial spot (Louws et al., 2001;
  Obradovic et al., 2004; Byrne et al., 2005; Huang et al., 2012).


Bacterial speck

Caused by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Okabe) Young, Dye, & Wilkie, this
gram-negative aerobic bacterium occurs in nearly every region of the world
where tomato is produced. It is considered a cool season pathogen that is
easily dispersed by rain and in water. Disease development is favoured by low
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                225


­temperatures (18–24°C) and high humidity. Initial symptoms consist of small
 water-soaked lesions that become brown and necrotic with a prominent yellow
 halo surrounding the lesion, typically less than 1 mm in diameter. Under high
 disease pressure, lesions can coalesce and lead to blighting of foliar tissues.
 All above-ground tissues are susceptible to the pathogen, including stems,
 petioles, peduncles, sepals and fruit. Developing fruit lesions become sunken,
 with tissues surrounding the lesion exhibiting a darker green coloration, and
 ­typically less than 1 mm in diameter, though larger lesions can develop under
  favourable conditions.
        Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato is a successful epiphyte of many common
  weed species and capable of surviving on crop residue for extended periods of
  time. Two races (race 0 and race 1) have been identified. Disease is managed
  by avoiding successive crops in the same field, using clean seed, producing
  disease-free transplants and keeping fields free of weeds and volunteer tomatoes
  (McCarter et al., 1983). Disease management in transplant and field production
  has relied heavily on the use of copper-based fungicides, which has led to the
  establishment of copper-tolerant strains in many areas of the world. Similar to
  bacterial spot, the use of chemical elicitors of systemic acquired ­resistance and
  rhizobacteria have demonstrated efficacy in managing bacterial speck (Louws
  et al., 2001; Graves and Alexander, 2002; Ji et al., 2006).


Bacterial canker

Caused by the gram-positive, non-spore-forming and aerobic bacterium
Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. michiganensis (Smith) Davis et al., bacterial canker
is a devastating disease of tomato production throughout the world, especially
in commercial greenhouse settings (Gleason et al., 1993). Early symptoms
consist of an upward curling and necrosis of leaflet margins, and a wilting of
leaflets that is often unilateral; leaf petioles initially remain turgid (Fig. 7.6).
Although symptoms typically begin in the lower leaves and progress acrop-
etally, the pathogen is easily introduced through wounds or pruning cuts and
can then spread downwards through the plant. Eventually the wilt progresses,
leading to plant death. Vascular tissues within the stems, and especially within
nodes, display a yellow to reddish brown discoloration. The pith tissues of
wilting plants also become discoloured and break down. These symptoms of
wilt and vascular discoloration of stem and pith tissues are easily confused with
bacterial wilt. However, bacterial streaming from the cut stems of bacterial
canker-infected plants is limited and consists of yellow ooze when squeezed.
     Occasionally, leaves can develop off-white blister-like spots that are sur-
rounded by a dark ring of necrotic tissue. The veins of these infected leaves typ-
ically darken, with the leaflets turning yellow as the bacterium spreads. Fruit
symptoms do not always occur but consist of a raised brown centre surrounded
by an opaque white halo, usually 3–6 mm in diameter. The fruit lesions, often
226                              G.E. Vallad et al.




Fig. 7.6. Foliar symptoms of bacterial canker on tomato. (Photograph courtesy
Gary Vallad.)

referred to as bird’s-eye spot, tend to give the fruit a scabby appearance and are
very characteristic of the disease.
     Infected seed and transplants are the most important sources of ­inoculum.
Other sources include plant debris, weed hosts, volunteer plants and ­contaminated
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management              227


stakes and tools. Like many pathogenic bacteria, the disease is easily
spread through contaminated water via rain splash, equipment, or various
hand operations such as staking, tying, pruning and grafting. Plants from
infected seed may die, or show few to no symptoms, and infected trans-
plants may take 3–6 weeks to display symptoms – all factors that increase
the difficulty of management and emphasize the need for strict sanita-
tion practices to limit spread in greenhouse production environments
(Chang et al., 1991, 1992; Hausbeck et al., 2000; Xu et al., 2010; Tancos
et al., 2013).


Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum

This phloem-limited unculturable bacterium is primarily transmitted by the to-
mato/potato psyllid Bactericera cockerelli (Homoptera: Psyllidae) or indirectly
through grafting. The bacterium is closely related to Candidatus L. asiaticus,
Candidatus L. africanum and Candidatus L. americanus, the reported causal
agents of huanglongbing (commonly referred to as citrus greening) of citrus
and other members of the family Rutaceae (Secor et al., 2009; Levy et al.,
2011; Lin et al., 2011). Candidatus L. solanacearum has been found in several
members of the Solanaceae, causing zebra chip in potato (Solanum tuberosum).
Symptoms on tomato consist of a spiky chlorotic apical growth, a general mot-
tling of leaves, plant stunting and fruit deformation. Because of its uncultur-
able state, detection requires the use of PCR primers specific to the16s rRNA
gene, which has also led to the detection of Candidatus L. solanacearum in
several other Solanaceae to include tamarillo (Solanum betaceum), cape goose-
berry (Physalis peruviana) and peppers (Capsicum spp.) (Liefting et al., 2009).
Management of the psyllid vector is the only means currently available for
managing Liberibacter.


Early blight

Traditionally this disease was attributed primarily to the fungus Alternaria
solani (Ell. & Mart.) L.R. Jones & Gout, but recent work has identified additional
Alternaria spp. capable of causing early blight symptoms on tomato, including
A. tomatophila (Weir et al., 1998; Simmons, 2000; Rodrigues et al., 2010) and
A. grandis (Rodrigues et al., 2010). Symptoms of early blight consist of light to
dark brown circular lesions that develop characteristic alternating light and
dark concentric rings as the lesion expands over time (Fig. 7.7). Yellow chlor-
otic tissue may surround the lesions and the entire leaf may turn yellow as
lesions expand and coalesce. The disease typically starts on older leaves but
may also develop on stems and fruit. Severe stem lesions can girdle and kill
plants. Fruit infections usually begin near the top of the fruit at the calyx, or
where the stem attaches to the fruit, and will also develop concentric rings
228                              G.E. Vallad et al.




                                                      Fig. 7.7. Foliar symptoms of early
                                                      blight. (Photograph courtesy Gary
                                                      Vallad.)

as they ­enlarge. Infection of seedlings and transplants often leads to a collar
rot that can quickly spread and kill young plants. Disease development is fa-
voured by conditions with mild temperatures (24–29 °C) and frequent rains or
heavy dews that promote spore germination. Under ideal conditions with free
moisture, spores germinate within 2 h, with developing visible lesions within
2–3 days. The fungus produces spores that are dispersed with air currents to
other susceptible plants. In addition, A. solani can produce specialized struc-
tures called chlamydospores that can survive in soil for up to a year (Patterson,
1991). The fungus survives between seasons on seed, infected plant debris, on
volunteer tomatoes and other solanaceous weeds, stressing the importance
of sanitation and crop rotations for managing the disease. Proper fertilization
is also critical to maintain vigorous growth, since older senescent tissues are
most susceptible to the fungus. Varieties with resistance or tolerance to the
disease are commercially available (Gardner and Panthee, 2012). Finally, the
timely application of protective fungicides is often necessary for effective man-
agement, especially when environmental conditions favour disease.
                     Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                229


Grey leafspot

Caused by three species of the fungus Stemphylium (S. botryosum f.sp. lycopersici,
S. solani Weber and S. floridanum Hannon and Weber), grey leafspot is a devas-
tating foliar disease of tomato wherever susceptible varieties are grown under
warm humid environments (Weber, 1930; Hannon and Weber, 1955; Rotem
and Bashi, 1977; Camara et al., 2002; Nasehi et al., 2014). Foliar symptoms
consist of small random brownish-black lesions that can be round to oblong in
shape. The lesion centres are grey with dark brown to black margins and the
lesion centres may crack. Infected leaves with numerous or larger lesions will
yellow and drop. Grey leafspot primarily affects the foliage; only rarely will it af-
fect stems or petioles when optimum conditions for disease exists. Infection of
seedlings can also lead to defoliation without any obvious yellowing. Although
this disease does not affect fruit directly, premature defoliation can expose fruit
to sunlight and rain, leading to sunscald and raincheck. Stemphylium species
affect a broad range of weed and plant species and will overseason on residues.
Ensuring the timely destruction of plant residues in the field, and disinfecting
pots, tools and production surfaces in the greenhouse, will limit the carry-over
of pathogens from one crop to the next. Effective commercial resistance ex-
ists and is the primary means of managing grey leafspot (Andrus et al., 1942;
Hendrix and Frazier, 1949; Bashi et al., 1973; Blancard and Laterrot, 1986).


Grey mould

Caused by the fungus Botrytis cinerea Fr., grey mould is typically a minor dis-
ease that can affect all above-ground tomato tissues in field and greenhouse
production. Botrytis is considered an opportunistic pathogen of tomato, col-
onizing tissues wounded during production activities or injured by insect ac-
tivity. The disease is typically associated with mature plants that have a dense
canopy and often begins during cooler weather, not requiring prolonged
periods of moisture beyond what is available within the canopy (Wilson, 1963;
Verhoeff, 1968; Yunis et al., 1990a,b; Elad and Yunis, 1993; O’Neil et al.,
1997). Symptoms typically begin on older senescent tissues and consist of nec-
rotic tissue that is covered with a grey to brown velvety mass of fungal sporo-
phores. After periods of high humidity these sporophores can produce copious
amounts of spores that are easily liberated as a cloud of spores when the in-
fected tissue is moved. The fungus may also produce irregularly shaped dark
brown to black sclerotia within infected tissues. The fungus can start on sen-
escing leaf tissues that can progress into younger leaf tissues, leaf petioles and
finally stem infections. Stem infections can also be initiated through pruning
wounds, at graft union wounds, or wounds created from rubbing against string
or stakes used to keep plants upright. Stem infections can girdle the plant and
cause wilting of upper foliage. The fungus can also infect senescent flower
230                               G.E. Vallad et al.


petals, which can lead to the infection of the developing fruit, a direct fruit
infection if the petals remain attached to the fruit; as such resulting infections
occur at either the stem or blossom end of fruit (Fig. 7.8). Infected petals can
even lead to stem infections if the petals get lodged within stem–petiole junc-
tions. Direct infection of young fruit from spores can cause the appearance of
a necrotic fleck accompanied by a characteristic white halo referred to as a
ghost spot as fruit ripen. These ghost spots are sites where the fungus had pene-
trated the epidermis of the young fruit and then died. Successful infections of
green mature or ripening fruits leads to a typical soft rot with watery, sunken,
whitish lesions that rupture in the centre and eventually affects the entire fruit.
Infected fruits, if not rogued, can lead to large postharvest losses during ship-
ments. B. cinerea is a weak pathogen of numerous plants and a common sapro-
phyte of decaying plant tissues, making sanitation through the removal or
destruction of senescent and dead plant tissues the primary means of reducing
the threat of the disease. Regardless, spores are windborne and easily dissem-
inated over long distances. The fungus can be controlled with the preventive




                                                       Fig. 7.8. Botrytis fruit rot of
                                                       ­tomato. (Photograph courtesy
                                                        Gary Vallad.)
                     Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management               231


application of fungicides prior to the formation of dense canopies. In addition,
the liming of acidic soil can limit disease by improving calcium levels in plants
(Stall et al., 1965). In addition to proper pruning and plant nutrition, the ability
to manipulate environmental variables can greatly aid control of grey mould
in protected structures, by minimizing the microclimatic conditions necessary
for the fungus to infect and spread (Elad et al., 1988; Yunis et al., 1990a,b; Elad
and Yunis, 1993).


Hairy root disease

Hairy root disease, also referred to as ‘crazy root’ or ‘root mat’, is mostly as-
sociated with the hydroponic production of tomato, aubergine and cucurbits,
though the disease can occur in soil as well. The disease consists of an extreme
proliferation of roots that promotes strong vegetative growth at the expense of
fruit yield (reduced fruit set and fruit size) (Bosmans et al., 2017). In addition,
plants with hairy root disease are more prone to other diseases caused by weak
secondary pathogens, such as Pythium and Pseudomonas species (Weller et al.,
2006). The disease is caused by several members of the genus Agrobacterium
that carry a root-inducing (Ri) plasmid, which is the sole pathogenicity factor
for the agrobacterium. Similar to the transfer of tumour-inducing (Ti) plas-
mids associated with members of A. tumefaciens that cause crown gall disease,
symptoms of hairy root are the result of the natural transformation of root
cells by a portion of the Ri plasmid (the T-DNA), which encodes genes for the
production of specific opines and increased sensitivity to plant auxins. The
opines are a specialized class of carbohydrates that can only be utilized by
the specific agrobacterium (Dessaux et al., 1998; Wetzel et al., 2014), while the
increased sensitivity to auxins leads to the prolific root growth. Incidentally,
since the Ri plasmid confers pathogenicity, it has been associated with several
members of what is also referred to as rhizogenic Agrobacterium biovar 1 and
biovar 2. Members of rhizogenic Agrobacterium biovar 1 are most commonly
associated with hairy root disease in hydroponic production, while biovar 2 are
most commonly associated with the disease in soil (Bosmans et al., 2015). Both
Agrobacterium biovars are heterogenic groups that contain tumorogenic strains
of A. tumefaciens, rhizogenic strains of A. rhizogenes and avirulent strains of
A. radiobacter. Recent changes in classification (Lindström and Young, 2011)
led to the redesignation of Agrobacterium biovar 2 to Rhizobium rhizogenes, and
Agrobacterium biovar 1 to Agrobacterium tumefaciens species complex until add-
itional genomic information is provided to further delineate this heterogeneous
complex.
     There are no treatment options once plants are transformed with the
T-DNA from the Ri plasmid, and the causal rhizogenic Agrobacterium biovar
1 strains agents easily persist within irrigation systems. Therefore, management
relies on tactics to eliminate the pathogen from the system or through changes
232                              G.E. Vallad et al.


in cultural practices to reduce the effect of the disease (Bosmans et al., 2017).
Various cultural practices, including changes in substrate (Aghdak et al.,
2016), nutrient solution, water cycles, and other practices to increase light
and oxygen, may help to manage hairy root disease but still require further
investigation (Bosmans et al., 2017). Chemical disinfection of water sources,
irrigation systems and the recirculated nutrient solutions has utilized a variety
of techniques to include the application of ultraviolet light (Pozos et al., 2004)
and biocidal compounds, such as benzalkonium chloride, cetyltrimethylam-
monium bromide, quaternary ammonium, sodium hypochlorite and hydrogen
peroxide. The latter is most preferred, as it degrades into benign secondary
products, eliminating any residue concerns, and does not corrode infrastruc-
ture. Effective reduction of rhizogenic Agrobacterium populations requires high
levels of hydrogen peroxide, since many of the strains are catalase-positive and
can tolerate hydrogen peroxide (Bosmans et al., 2015). This requires growers
to monitor levels throughout irrigation systems to maintain effective hydrogen
peroxide concentrations of 50 ppm for catalase-negative strains to as high as
100 ppm for catalase-positive strains (Bosmans et al., 2016).


Late blight

Caused by the fungal-like oomycete Phytophthora infestans (Mont.) de Bary, late
blight is one of the most destructive foliar pathogens of tomato and potato.
On tomato, the disease affects foliage, stems and fruit. Foliar infection begins
as a water-soaked lesion that becomes brown and necrotic as the lesion ex-
pands. Under cool, humid conditions, white mycelium and sporulation can
often be seen on the underside of the lesion and along the lesion margin. Often
the healthy leaf tissue surrounding the lesion has a light green appearance.
Rapidly expanding lesions can have a zonate appearance. Tissues rapidly blight
under favourable conditions as leaf lesions coalesce or the fungus progresses
to the leaf petiole. The rapid necrosis gives the blighted tissues a distinctive
light brown, shrivelled appearance as if they were burned or exposed to frost,
especially if tissues do not become colonized by other saprophytic organisms.
Stems and petioles can also be directly infected with lesions progressing in a
manner similar to foliar infections but can be girdled by the fungus, leading to
wilting of associated foliage. Fruit infections begin as dark green greasy spots
on the fruit that eventually turn light brown or greyish as the fruit begins to
ripen. Fruit lesions can also have a zonate appearance as the lesions expand,
and white mycelium and sporulation appear on the lesion surfaces when cool,
humid conditions exist.
     The pathogen typically survives from season to season on infected fruit
(cull piles) and infected volunteer plants of tomato and potato, requiring living
tissue to overwinter in most temperate climates. However, in some areas of the
world, strains of both mating types of the fungus are present, allowing the
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management             233


fungus to produce a specialized thick-walled structure called an oospore that
can survive in the soil or plant debris. Disease development can be rapid, espe-
cially when conditions favour sporulation; optimum conditions are 91–100%
relative humidity and temperatures of 18–22°C, though sporulation can still
occur to as low as 3°C and as high as 26°C. Sanitation in the form of destroying
cull piles and volunteers is critical for management, in addition to using clean
transplants and timely applications of preventive fungicides when conditions
are favourable for disease (Becktell et al., 2005; Kamoun and Smart, 2005;
Cooke et al., 2011; Nowicki et al., 2012; Fry et al., 2013; Arora et al., 2014).


Leaf mould

The fungus Passalora fulva (Cooke) U. Braun & Crous (syn. Cladosporium fulvum
Cooke and Fulvia fulva (Cooke) Ciferri) is responsible for leaf mould (Crous and
Braun, 2003). Foliar symptoms of leaf mould typically begin on older leaves,
consisting of pale green or yellow patches on the upper leaf surfaces that even-
tually turn a bright yellow. The underside of the affected leaves will be covered
with patches of an olive-green mould; often the tissue surrounding the mould
will be a pale green or white compared with unaffected tissue. Affected leaves
will eventually curl and drop. The disease is usually limited to older leaves but
can also develop on younger leaves and can even affect petioles, peduncles,
stems, blossoms and fruit under favourable conditions. Affected fruit will have
a black dry rot on the stem end of the fruit.
     The disease is more common in greenhouse production but can occur in
the field as well and is favoured by relative humidity above 85% and temper-
atures of 22–24°C, though symptoms can develop at 4–32°C. Sanitation and
limiting humidity are key to controlling the disease in greenhouse production.
Spores are easily dispersed in the air and the fungus can survive as a saprophyte
in the soil on leaf tissue. Therefore, removing and destroying diseased plant
debris, in addition to keeping the relative humidity below 85% (see Chapter 9),
can limit the disease in greenhouse production. Staking and pruning plants
can also help to reduce relative humidity by improving air movement through
the canopy. Several genes conferring host resistance are known and widely de-
ployed (Rivas and Thomas, 2002, see Chapter 2).


Powdery mildew

Several fungi are known to cause powdery mildew on tomato: Leveillula taurica
(Lev.) G. Arnaud (asexual stage = Oidiopsis taurica) and two species of Oidium
(O. neolycopersici and O. lycopersici) for which the sexual stage remains un-
known (Kiss et al., 2001). The two Oidium species cause the more classic form
of powdery mildew consisting of white patches of mycelium and spores on
234                               G.E. Vallad et al.


upper and lower surfaces of foliar tissue, including stems, petioles, peduncles
and blooms, and even on fruit. Infected tissue may initially darken, taking on a
purple hue before turning yellow, and eventually develop into a necrotic lesion.
With older infections, the mycelium will usually turn greyish as well. Most im-
portantly, since Oidium grows epiphytically on the leaf surface, the mycelium,
conidiophores and conidia are easily observed. Conidia of O. neolycopersici are
ellipsoid–ovoid in shape and form singly or occasionally in small chains of two
to three spores from simple conidiophores, whereas O. lycopersici produces
chains of three to five elliptical to doliform-shaped spores (Jones et al., 2001;
Kiss et al., 2001).
      In contrast, mycelium of O. taurica (the asexual stage of L. taurica) grows
endophytically beneath the leaf epidermis, with conidiophores and conidia de-
veloping through the stomata in the lower leaf surface. Symptoms are typic-
ally confined to mature leaves, starting as pale green irregularly shaped spots
on the upper leaf surface. Lesions become yellow and necrotic and have an
angular, vein delimited appearance as they expand. Since the fungus grows
within the leaf tissue, mycelium and conidia are limited to the oldest portions
of the lesions on the underside of the leaf and only present when conditions
are favourable (relative humidity > 95%). O. taurica is dimorphic, producing
pointed or lanceolate primary conidia and cylindrical secondary conidia with
rounded ends. The sexual stage, L. taurica, produces globose structures with
spiked appendages called cleistothecia that bear specialized ascospores that are
the products of sexual reproduction. L. taurica has a broad host range but ap-
pears to be more associated with tomato production in drier climates (Correll
et al., 1987). Regardless of the causal pathogen, powdery mildew is managed
through the repeated application of foliar fungicides.


Septoria leaf spot

Caused by Septoria lycopersici Speg., Septoria leaf spot is a destructive disease of
tomatoes throughout the world. Although the disease affects all above-ground
tissues, symptoms usually start on the lower leaves after fruit set as small cir-
cular lesions with dark brown margins and tan to greyish centres. Foliar le-
sions are often surrounded by a narrow band of chlorosis and the lesion
centres are dotted with small black fungal structures called pycnidia. Fruit in-
fections are rare but stem, petiole and calyx infections produce smaller lesions
that may not produce pycnidia. Each pycnidium exudes massive amounts of
spores within a gelatinous mass in the presence of moisture. These spores are
readily splash-disseminated by rain or overhead irrigation. Symptoms typically
progress up the plant over the season.
     The disease is most problematic in temperate production areas, where long
periods of leaf wetness, high relative humidity and temperatures of 20–25°C
occur (Pritchard and Porte, 1924). The fungus can be seed-borne and also can
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                235


survive between production seasons on infected tomato debris, or susceptible
weeds, and on stakes and cages used to support tomatoes during production.
Control is based on crop rotation and field sanitation, acquiring clean seed,
limiting leaf wetness or the handling of wet plants, improving air flow within
the canopy and the timely application of protective fungicides.


Target spot

Target spot is caused by the fungus Corynespora cassiicola (Burk & Curt.) Wei., a
common foliar pathogen and saprophyte of diverse plants in tropical and sub-
tropical environments. Initial foliar symptoms of target spot on tomato consist
of small pinpoint water-soaked lesions that appear on the upper leaf surface.
Lesions eventually turn dark to tan brown and can easily be mistaken for symp-
toms of bacterial spot or speck. However, as the lesions increase in size, the dis-
tinctive tan centre surrounded with darkened circular bands ­develops within
the lesion (Fig. 7.9). These lesions are often surrounded by a narrow band of
chlorosis. Expanding lesions can coalesce, leading to the rapid collapse of leaf-
lets. Similarly, these expanding lesions can girdle petioles and stems, leading to
a rapid blight of affected foliar tissues. Tomato fruits are also quite ­susceptible




                                         Fig. 7.9. Foliar symptoms of target spot
                                         caused by Corynespora cassiicola.
                                         (Photograph courtesy Gary Vallad.)
236                                G.E. Vallad et al.


to the disease. On ripe fruits, large brown circular lesions develop with pale
brown centres that often crack. Lesions on green immature fruits begin as
small, dark brown, sunken lesions that can quickly develop into craters as
they expand, especially as the fruit ripens. Lesions also render fruits prone to
secondary infections by soft rot organisms. Resistance to target spot has been
identified and reportedly conferred by a single recessive gene (Bliss et al., 1973)
but little progress has been made to further incorporate this resistance into
commercial cultivars.
      C. cassiicola is a diverse pathogen with a broad host range that includes
more than 280 plant hosts documented in over 70 countries (Farr et al., 2007).
In addition, studies have revealed that more diversity exists among global iso-
lates of C. cassiicola than previously recognized, including isolates recovered
from hosts in Florida (Dixon et al., 2009). Of the 50 isolates from American
Samoa, Brazil, Malaysia, Micronesia and the USA tested for pathogenicity on
eight known hosts of C. cassiicola, 23 were rated as moderately to highly viru-
lent on tomato. Of these 23 isolates, 14 were originally isolated from tomato
and the remaining nine from diverse hosts such as basil, bean, cucumber,
lantana, papaya, pumpkin and sweet potato. Most of the isolates were patho-
genic on several of the hosts tested, but one isolate, GU28 from Guam, was
only pathogenic on tomato. More importantly, these 23 isolates clustered into
four of the five phylogentic clades based on variation from ribosomal DNA
­internal transcribed spacer (rDNA ITS), ga4, caa5 and act1 sequences (Dixon
 et al., 2009). This agrees with an earlier study showing that diversity exists
 among isolates of C. cassiicola regarding host range, with some isolates exhib-
 iting some level of host specificity (Onesirosan et al., 1974).


COMMON CROWN AND ROOT DISEASES OF TOMATO

Bacterial wilt

Bacertial wilt is a serious soilborne disease caused by the gram-negative bac-
terium Ralstonia solanacearum that affects many solanaceous crops, including
tomato. The disease begins as the pathogen enters roots through wounds and
natural openings, colonizing plant xylem vessels. As the pathogen progresses
acropetally, it produces copious amounts of polysaccharides that plug vas-
cular tissues and lead to a wilt of foliar tissues. Initial wilting symptoms can be
subtle, beginning with the upper apical tissues that will often recover at night.
However, as symptoms progress the entire plant will develop an irreversible wilt
that eventually leads to death. Bacterial wilt is often referred to as a ‘green wilt’
as symptoms often progress rapidly with little or no chlorosis of foliar tissues,
unlike vascular wilts caused by species of Fusarium or Verticillium. Infected
plants also develop adventitious roots on the lower stem. Vascular tissues of
infected plants develop a yellow to light brown discoloration that becomes dark
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management              237


brown as the disease progresses and spreads upwards through crown and stem
tissues. Pith tissues within the crown and stems also develop the brown discol-
oration and begin to break down, making the stems soft and easy to squeeze.
Submerging the cut stem of an infected plant in water allows the bacterium to
stream with a milky white appearance and can serve as a quick diagnostic to
distinguish this disease from those caused by other vascular pathogens. Strains
of R. solanacearum are quite variable and have historically been divided into
several races and biovars based loosely on host range and ability to utilize cer-
tain carbohydrates, respectively (Denny and Hayward, 2001; Denny, 2006).
The pathogen was reclassified into four phylotypes and sequevars, based on
the phylogenetic analysis of several loci among global strains, which has cor-
responded with ancestral relationships and geographical origins of strains
(Alvarez, 2005; Fegan and Prior, 2005; Prior and Fegan, 2005). Unlike most
bacterial plant pathogens, R. solanacearum can survive in the soil in the absence
of a host plant; and it has a broad host range of over 200 species of cultivated
plants and weeds in 33 plant families, making disease management through
crop rotation and fallow programmes impractical. In addition, R. solanacearum
is easily disseminated through contaminated water, soil, machinery and plant
material, including transplants. Chemical fumigation (see Chapter 8) can reduce
disease development but typically fails to give season-long control. Conventional
and biologically based pesticides offer little practical control of the disease.
Breeding efforts throughout the world have led to the development of tomato
varieties with partial resistance to bacterial wilt, though the performance of
these varieties has varied when trialled at different locations. Grafting sus-
ceptible tomato varieties to resistant rootstocks has gained global interest and
offers a viable option for production in problematic areas (Rivard et al., 2012).


Fusarium wilt and Fusarium crown and root rot

Fusarium wilt caused by Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici (FOL) and
Fusarium crown and root rot caused by Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici
(FORL) are both serious soilborne diseases of tomato throughout the world. In
older plants, the initial symptoms of Fusarium wilt consist of a characteristic
yellowing and wilting of lower leaves (Fig. 7.10). This yellowing and wilting
quickly spreads further up the plant, often limited to only one side of the plant,
and eventually leads to plant death. A distinct yellow to dark brown vascular
discoloration extending from roots and crown up through the stems of symp-
tomatic tissues is a key characteristic of the disease.
     Fusarium crown and root rot occurs in both field and greenhouse ­tomatoes.
Initial symptoms consist of a yellowing of lower leaves, which eventually be-
come necrotic and wither. These symptoms move up the plant and, depending
on the age of the plant, can result in stunting or even a sudden collapse of the
plant. A yellow to brown discoloration can be found in the vascular tissues of
238                               G.E. Vallad et al.




Fig. 7.10. Initial foliar symptoms of Fusarium wilt of tomato. (Photograph
courtesy Gary Vallad.)


infected plants but, unlike Fusarium wilt, is typically only found in the roots,
crown and lower stem of the plant. Fusarium crown and root rot can be intro-
duced to new production fields by means of infected seeds, transplants, soil
and compost (Jarvis, 1988; Hartman and Fletcher, 1991; Menzies and Jarvis,
1994). Once introduced, this polycyclic pathogen can be disseminated via root-
to-root contact, dispersal of airborne conidia, water flow and fungus gnats of
the genus Bradisya (Rowe et al., 1977; Jarvis, 1988; Hartman and Fletcher,
1991; Gillespie and Menzies, 1993; Rekah et al., 1999), making control of this
disease more difficult.
     Fusarium crown and root rot is favoured by cool weather (below 20°C) in
both field and greenhouse tomatoes, and is commonly associated with winter
and spring tomato plantings. The host range of FORL consists of at least 36
other plant species (Menzies et al., 1990). In contrast, FOL thrives in warm
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management              239


weather (Jones et al., 1991) and consists of three races that are host-specific to
tomato. Of these three races, race 3 was shown to have a better over-seasoning
ability than races 1 and 2. A major vegetative compatibility group (VCG) was
previously identified in Florida (VCG 0033), which belongs to race 3 (Gale et al.,
2003). Epidemiologically, as with FORL, the sporulation on tomato stems and
aerial dissemination of conidia of FOL have been reported to cause serious out-
breaks (Katan et al., 1997); although the relative importance of aerial dissem-
ination compared with soilborne inoculum in field epidemics has never been
fully substantiated, it may be more important in greenhouse operations where
constant plant pruning (see Chapter 9) creates wounds for the fungus to poten-
tially colonize. Other dissemination methods include contaminated seeds,
tomato stakes, soils and transplants (Jones et al., 1991).
     Although FOL and FORL may be differentiated in the field based on symp-
tomology and disease development, morphologically the two causal pathogens
are indistinguishable from each other and from non-pathogenic isolates of
F. oxysporum. Most modern field tomato varieties carry genetic resistance to
races 1 and 2 of FOL but only a few varieties have resistance to FOL race 3 and
to FORL. Long rotations with non-susceptible crops, deep tillage practices to
bury inoculum and infested debris, and pre-treating soils with effective chem-
ical fumigants are all practices that can help reduce inoculum levels in subse-
quent crops. When possible, removing and destroying infected plants can help
to reduce the amount of inoculum released into the soil.


Nematodes

Nematodes are microscopic roundworms that live in water or the films of mois-
ture that coat soil particles. Several genera of nematodes are reported parasites
of tomato, each varying in its below-ground life cycle and the symptoms associ-
ated with infected root tissues. Foliar symptoms typical of nematode infections
include chlorosis, stunting, wilting, premature senescence and reduced fruit
yields; these symptoms are most severe with early plant infections. Nematode
infections can also increase plant vulnerability to soilborne plant pathogens,
such as Verticillium and Fusarium spp. (Back et al., 2002). Economically, the
most important group of parasitic nematodes on tomato are various species of
Meloidogyne that cause swelling of roots at the sites of infection known as galls
or knots. These knots are the result of nematode feeding and cannot be rubbed
off. As such, Meloidogyne spp. are commonly referred to as ‘root-knot nema-
todes’ based on the resulting root symptoms. Genetic resistance to Meloidogyne
spp. is conferred by the Mi gene (Williamson, 1998; Jacquet et al., 2005).
Other nematode species reported to parasitize tomato include Belonolaimus
longicaudatus (sting nematode), Rotylenchus reniformis (reniform nematode),
Pratylenchus spp. (root lesion nematodes), Nacobbus spp. (false root-knot nema-
todes), Globodera spp. (potato cyst nematodes), Tylenchorhynchus spp. (stunt
240                              G.E. Vallad et al.


nematodes), Xiphinema spp. (dagger nematodes) and Trichodorus spp. (stubby
root nematodes). These nematode species vary in their life cycles and can in-
fect a broad range of plants, making field management extremely difficult. In
addition, they are easily moved throughout production areas with soil on farm
machinery, infested plant materials, animals, farmyard manure and in surface
runoff water (Noling and Ferris, 2012).


Southern blight

Southern blight is caused by the basidiomycete fungus Sclerotium rolfsii Sacc.
(Athelia rolfsii (Curzi) Tu & Kimbrough) (Aycock, 1966). Besides tomato, the
fungus has a broad host range that includes hundreds of plant species and is
most problematic in subtropical and tropical regions of the world. Southern
blight can develop at any stage of plant growth, favoured by moist and aer-
obic soil conditions and high temperatures of 30–35°C. Symptoms begin as
a water-soaked lesion on the stem at or just below the soil line that turns
into a brown to black open lesion. The lesion can expand rapidly, girdling
the stem at the crown and leading to a rapid green wilt of all upper foliage.
Under humid conditions, a mat of robust white mycelium is often visible on
top of the soil surrounding the plant, extending to the stem lesion and some-
times even several centimetres up the stem. Sometimes this mycelial mat may
not develop until the plant is dead and it can often extend to neighbouring
plants, allowing the fungus to infect multiple plants in a patch or down a
plant row. After a few days, numerous tan to black sclerotia, 1–2 mm in
diameter, will develop on the mycelial mat. Any fruits exposed to infested soil
or contacting the lower stem near an infection point are also prone to infec-
tion by S. rolfsii. Fruit infection begins as a yellowish, sunken, water-soaked
lesion that expands, leading to fruit collapse within 3–4 days with white my-
celium and developing sclerotia filling the cavity. In addition, the fungus is
a good saprophyte capable of colonizing and producing sclerotia on various
host substrates. Sclerotia are the primary inoculum; they can survive in the
soil and on plant debris for years and are easily disseminated through the
movement of soil or plant debris. Although the perfect basidial stage of this
fungus (A. rolfsii) has been induced in vitro, its role in disease remains unclear
(Punja, 1985).
     Because of the longevity of sclerotia in the soil and the broad host range
of the fungus, control of southern blight in problematic fields can be difficult,
especially when conditions favour rapid disease development. Long rotations
with non-susceptible grass crops, deep tillage practices to bury inoculum
and infested debris, and pre-treating soils with effective chemical fumigants
are all practices that can help to reduce inoculum levels in subsequent crops.
When possible, removing and destroying infected plants can help to reduce the
amount of inoculum released into the soil.
                     Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                  241


Verticillium wilt

Caused by the soilborne fungi Verticillium albo-atrum Reinke & Berthold
and V. dahliae Kleb., Verticillium wilt is a vascular wilt disease affecting over
200 plant species and is quite common to most tomato production regions
throughout the world. Symptoms commence as a wilting of plants, begin-
ning with the lower leaves. The affected lower leaves develop a marginal and
interveinal chlorosis. Often, the interveinal chlorosis will form characteristic
angular V-shaped ­lesions on affected leaflets. These symptoms progress acrop-
etally, sometimes only affecting one side of the plant, but gradually lead to
wilting of the entire plant and death. A light brown to yellow vascular discolor-
ation is evident in the stems of infected plants, especially in the lower stems, but
does not extend into the pith of stem tissues or into petioles. These symptoms
are easily confused with other vascular wilt diseases, such as Fusarium wilt.
However, the progression of wilt symptoms, chlorosis and vascular discolor-
ation is slower and less pronounced compared with Fusarium wilt. Sometimes
symptoms of Verticillium wilt are subtle enough to be mistaken for inadequate
irrigation (Klosterman et al., 2009; Nunez, 2012).
      Both Verticillium species are widely distributed, though V. dahliae is the most
prevalent pathogen. Each is capable of surviving in the soil in infested plant
material, or freely as dark resting mycelium in the case of V. albo-atrum, or as
microsclerotia in the case of V. dahliae. Both structures are melanized ­allowing
both Verticillium species to persist in soil for years, which in addition to their
broad host range makes these fungi difficult to manage. Long rotations with
non-susceptible grass crops, deep tillage practices to bury inoculum and infested
debris, and pre-treating soils with effective chemical fumigants are all prac-
tices that can help to reduce inoculum levels in subsequent crops. When pos-
sible, removing and destroying infected plants can help to reduce the amount
­inoculum released into the soil. Tomato varieties with the Ve gene are resistant
 to race 1 isolates of V. dahliae and V. albo-atrum, though race 2 isolates of V. dahl-
 iae are widely distributed throughout the world (Bender and Shoemaker, 1984;
 Dobinson et al., 1996; Klosterman et al., 2009; Nunez, 2012).


COMMON TOMATO DISEASES CAUSED BY VIRUSES
AND VIROIDS
Tomatoes are susceptible to numerous viruses and viroids that cause a myriad
of symptoms, including stunted or distorted growth, mottling of leaves, chlor-
osis, necrosis and plant death, depending on the exact virus/viroid. Viruses
are stretches of nucleic acid (RNA or DNA) with a protein coat (Zaitlin and
Hull, 1987). Viroids, on the other hand, consist solely of a small stretch (a few
hundred nucleobases) of circular, single-stranded, non-coding RNA. While the
genomes of viruses can encode numerous proteins necessary for pathogenesis
242                                G.E. Vallad et al.


and viral replication, viroids do not encode any proteins; but some viroids have
catalytic activity functioning as ribozymes. Evidence suggests that viroids dis-
rupt plant host processes through a process known as RNA interference (Itaya
et al., 2001; Di Serio et al., 2014).
      Diseases caused by viruses and viroids can be extremely difficult to control
and have the potential to cause extensive crop losses. Most viruses of tomato are
transmitted by insect or arthropod pests and are typically managed by control-
ling these pest populations and by eliminating potential viral reservoirs such
as infected tomatoes and other susceptible host plants from the production en-
vironment. Other viruses and all viroids are transmitted through mechanical
means, such as physical handling of the plant during production by humans
or machinery, or through plant-to-plant contact, and are typically seed-borne.
These mechanically transmitted viruses and viroids pose a significant threat
to greenhouse tomato production since plants are handled on almost a daily
basis (see Chapter 9), facilitating rapid spread of the virus or viroid. In addition,
these mechanically transmitted viruses and viroids are capable of surviving
on contaminated work surfaces, tools and machinery for extended periods of
time, emphasizing the importance of strict sanitary measures to exclude these
viruses and viroids from the production environment and to limit their spread
upon introduction. Proper identification is crucial for controlling virus or
viroid outbreaks, as knowledge of the disseminating vector(s) and potential
viral/viroid reservoir(s) is critical for directing management tactics (Verhoeven
et al., 2004; Pearson et al., 2006; Adkins et al., 2012). The following section is
not intended to be an exhaustive review of the numerous viruses/viroids that
afflict tomatoes, but rather serves to give a brief overview of the most important
viruses in each virus family related to specific vectors and finally viroids.


Whitefly-transmitted begomoviruses – Tomato yellow leaf curl viruses
(TYLCV)

Begomovirus is the largest genus belonging to the viral family Geminiviridae, and
like other members of this family consists of single-stranded circular DNA gen-
omes encapsidated within quasi-isomeric virion particles. Begomoviruses can
be further divided into monopartite or bipartite forms, depending on whether
their genomes consist of one or two circular ssDNA molecules. Tomato produc-
tion throughout the tropical and subtropical regions of the world is besieged
by numerous begomoviruses coincidental with the spread of the whitefly,
Bemisia tabaci. Begomoviruses, once acquired, are transmitted by whiteflies in
a persistent circulative non-propagative manner (Czosnek and Laterrot, 1997;
Abhary et al., 2007; Lefeuvre et al., 2010).
     One of the most important and severe begomoviruses afflicting tomato is
Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) (Navot et al., 1991; Pico et al., 1996).
Typical symptoms of TYLCV consist of severe stunting of infected plants
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management               243


with shortened internodes, and erect terminal and axillary shoots (Fig. 7.3).
Developing leaves fail to expand and they develop leaflets that are reduced in
size and abnormally shaped, with the leaf margins being extremely chlorotic
and cupping upwards. Those plants infected early as seedlings are severely
stunted and fail to bear any fruit. Fruits set on older plants after infection will
ripen regularly, but subsequent fruits will be undersized, with the plant grad-
ually stopping fruit set altogether (Fig. 7.3). Flowers are unaffected by TYLCV
but abort and drop as the severity of symptoms progresses.
     Perhaps one of the most alarming features of begomoviruses is their ability
to develop variants through mutations, recombinations and pseudorecombina-
tions, which has resulted in rapid global diversification. This diversification has
led to a number of variants capable of causing symptoms of ‘leaf curl’ or ‘yellow
leaf curl’ throughout the world. Similar events are unfolding for another im-
portant bipartite begomovirus known as Tomato mottle virus, which is also
transmitted by whitefly but unlike TYLCV can be mechanically transmitted as
well. Several genes conferring resistance to TYLCV have been identified and one
gene, Ty-1, has been deployed in commercial tomato production (Lapidot et al.,
1997; Lapidot and Friedmann, 2002). Unfortunately, tomato varieties with re-
sistance to TYLCV can still be infected and propagate the virus (though symp-
toms are greatly reduced), serving as reservoirs for other susceptible plants.


Thrip-transmitted tospoviruses – Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV)

Tomato spotted wilt virus belongs to the genus Tospovirus, the only plant-­
infecting genus within the Bunyaviridae family of viruses. The genomes of
tospoviruses consist of a single-stranded RNA with negative polarity that is
divided into three segments termed small ‘S’ (2.9 kb), medium ‘M’ (5.4 kb)
and large ‘L’ (8.9 kb). Altogether, the three linear segments are 17.2 kb in size.
Tospoviruses are quite complex compared with other plant viruses, as each of
the three ssRNA segments is individually encapsidated and enveloped together
in a membrane derived from the host plant. All tospovirus members, including
TSWV, are transmitted by thrips in a persistent propagative manner. Although
at least ten species of thrips can transmit tospoviruses, Frankliniella occiden-
talis, the western flower thrips, is considered to be the most important, due to
its global distribution and ability to transmit most tospoviruses (Roselló et al.,
1996; Pappu et al., 2009; Webster et al., 2015).
     Symptoms of TSWV can vary considerably depending on the strain of the
virus and the age of the tomato plant at the time of infection. Young leaves of
infected tomato plants develop a bronze discoloration and develop numerous
small dark purple to black spots that can coalesce into streaks that can extend
down to petioles and even the terminal ends of stems. Early on, these spots
can look somewhat similar to fresh lesions of bacterial spot. However, the
spots associated with TSWV are typically located along leaf veins and do not
244                               G.E. Vallad et al.


show through both sides of the leaf. Infected plants may also develop a lop-
sided growth habit or even exhibit symptoms of wilt. Some new growing tips
in severely infected plants may die back and the terminal end of stems can de-
velop streaks. Tomato plants infected early may not develop any fruit, but those
infected after fruit set develop fruits with chlorotic ring spots. On green fruits
these ring spots are often subtle, with the centre of the spots being slightly
­upraised, but as the fruits ripen these ring spots become more pronounced in
 coloration with multiple concentric rings (Adkins et al., 2012).
      TSWV is unique compared with other tospoviruses, having a broad host
 range that includes over 1000 plant species and causing significant economic
 damage to many agronomic and horticultural crops. TSWV may be ubiquitous
 in some areas where it is able to infect many weeds, landscape plants and even
 native plants, allowing it to bridge tomato production seasons easily. For these
 reasons, most management strategies for TSWV rely on limiting or excluding
 the thrips vector and the use of resistant varieties (Saidi and Warade, 2008;
 Adkins et al., 2012; Gao et al., 2012).


Aphid-transmitted Alfalfa mosaic virus, Cucumber mosaic virus
and potyviruses

Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) is a positive-sense, single-stranded, tripartite
RNA virus that is vectored by several aphids in a non-persistent manner and
can also be transmitted mechanically. CMV is the type member of the genus
Cucumovirus in the family Bromoviridae, with worldwide distribution and a
host range that includes over 800 other crop and weed species (Roossinck,
1999). Symptoms vary but typically consist of severely stunted plants with
pronounced distortion of leaves, which become elongated but never expand
and are often referred to as ‘shoe-string’ or ‘strapped’. Many different strains of
CMV have been documented on tomato and other hosts (Adkins et al., 2012).
    The aphid-transmitted potyviruses Potato virus Y (PVY) and Tobacco etch
virus (TEV) belong to the family Potyviridae and consist of flexous filamentous
rod-shaped viral particles containing a linear positive-sense, single-stranded
monopartite RNA genome. Both PVY and TEV are vectored by aphids in a
non-persistent, non-circulative manner and can also be mechanically trans-
mitted through sap. Symptoms of PVY can vary greatly, depending on envir-
onmental conditions, tomato variety and virus strain, but typically consist of
a dark green banding of veins along the leaf, with mild mottling, mosaic and
some distortion of the leaves. As symptoms progress, interveinal necrosis can
develop on leaves and leaflets often curl downwards, giving the plant a droopy
appearance. PVY typically does not affect fruit, but plants infected early are
stunted, with reduced yield (Adkins et al., 2012).
    Symptoms of TEV consist of mottling and wrinkling of the leaves, vein
clearing and the characteristic necrotic lines or etching of the leaves. Fruits
                    Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management             245


from TEV-infected plants are mottled and often undersized. TEV affects peppers
and other members of the Solanaceae family, and many common weeds can
serve as a reservoir for this virus (Adkins et al., 2012).


Mechanically transmitted tobamoviruses – Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV)
and Tomato mosaic virus (ToMV)

Both TMV and ToMV are members of the genus Tobamovirus within the family
Virgaviridae, consisting of positive-sense RNA viruses with coat protein forming
straight rod viral particles. TMV and ToMV are typically grouped together be-
cause of their high similarity in host range and serological attributes. The
most common symptom of disease by either virus is leaves with mottled areas
of light and dark green. These affected leaves are typically curled, reduced in
size and somewhat malformed; the entire plant may be somewhat stunted
in growth. Fruit symptoms typically consist of uneven ripening and reductions
in size and number, though fruits can develop yellow rings at high temperat-
ures or develop an internal browning (similar to greywall) in mature green
fruit; other forms of fruit disfiguration can occur occasionally. Overall, plant
symptoms are greatly influenced by the viral strain, tomato cultivar, time of in-
fection relative to plant growth stage, temperature and light quality. Symptoms
can be exacerbated by high temperatures and low light intensity (Adkins et al.,
2012). However, tomato varieties with the Tm-2 and Tm-22 resistance genes
can express a severe necrotic reaction if exposed to TMV or ToMV at high tem-
peratures (Hall, 1980; Fraser and Loughlin, 1982).
     Due to their coat protein structure, TMV and ToMV are probably the most
persistent and infectious viruses in the plant world. Both viruses are mechanic-
ally transmitted and are spread by human activities. Those activities common
to tomato production such as grafting, transplanting, staking, tying, pruning
and harvesting disseminate the virus with ease (Broadbent and Fletcher, 1963;
Lanter et al., 1982). Since TMV can survive in tobacco products, the use of to-
bacco products near tomato production should be discouraged and personnel
should wash hands to inactivate the virus before and during plant-handling
procedures. Both viruses can also be seed-borne and so treating seeds with spe-
cialized disinfectants or heat is encouraged (Broadbent, 1965). Problematic
fields should be avoided, as TMV and ToMV can survive in plant debris,
­including roots, for prolonged periods of time (Adkins et al., 2012).


Mechanically transmitted Pepino mosaic virus

Pepino mosaic virus (PepMV) is a positive-sense, single-stranded, monopar-
tite virus that is a member of the family Alphaflexiviridae. PepMV was first
­described in Peru in 1974 on pepino (Solanum muricatum). PepMV was not
246                                G.E. Vallad et al.


­reported until it was rediscovered in tomato crops in Europe in 1998/1999.
 Ever since, PepMV has spread rapidly in greenhouse tomato production and
 is currently found throughout Europe and North America (Ling, 2008), likely
 introduced through contaminated seed (Hanssen et al., 2010). PepMV induces
 a wide range of symptoms on tomato, such as mosaic, leaf distortion, nettle-
 like heads, single yellow spots, interveinal chlorosis and fruit discoloration.
 Schenk et al. (2010) showed that tomato plants can be protected against PepMV
 by a preceding infection with an attenuated isolate of this virus. Infection with
 the attenuated isolates alone affected neither bulk yield nor quality of the har-
 vested tomato fruits.



Mechanically transmitted viroids – Potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTvd)

Viroids are unique to the plant kingdom consisting of only a highly complemen-
tary, circular, single-stranded RNA molecule ranging from 246 to 467 nucleo-
tides in length. These infectious RNA particles replicate through a process called
rolling circle synthesis using the host plant RNA polymerase II enzyme, which
is normally associated with messenger RNA synthesis in the host. Although
viroids do not code for any proteins, many act as ribozymes, having catalytic
properties to cleave and ligate replication intermediates of themselves. Due to
their lack of any proteins, viroids cannot be detected using serological methods
and therefore require molecular-based methods for detection and identification.
Viroids are divided into the Avsunviroidae and Pospiviroidae families. The first
identified and best characterized viroid of tomato and potato, Potato spindle tuber
viroid (PSTvd), is the type member of the Pospiviroid genus that includes sev-
eral other tomato-infecting viroids: Tomato chlorotic dwarf viroid, Mexican papita
viroid, Tomato planta macho viroid, Citrus exocortis viroid, Tomato apical stunt viroid
and Columnea latent viroid (Hammond and Owens, 2006).
     Initial symptoms of PSTvd in tomato consist of reduced growth and chlor-
osis of the terminal branches of the plant. As the symptoms progress, terminals
become more stunted with a loss of flower and fruit initiation and a severe
chlorosis that is often associated with a pronounced reddening or purpling of
the affected foliage. Leaf tissues often become brittle and some plants will die,
while others may partially recover (Owens and Verhoeven, 2009).
     Many viroids, like PSTvd, are seed-transmitted, but all are easily spread
mechanically through tools and handling of plant materials, which makes them
quite problematic in greenhouse production systems. Seed treatments are inef-
fective at eliminating viroids and no plant resistance or chemical treatments are
available for controlling viroids once a plant is infected. In addition, many viroid
outbreaks have been linked to contaminated, non-symptomatic ornamental spe-
cies (Verhoeven et al., 2010). Therefore, strict sanitary ­measures must be in place
to exclude viroid-contaminated materials from greenhouse production facilities
and to eradicate viroid-infected vegetative materials during an outbreak.
                       Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                       247



REFERENCES

Abhary, M., Patil, B. and Fauquet, C. (2007) Molecular biodiversity, taxonomy, and
    nomenclature of tomato yellow leaf curl-like viruses. In: Czosnek, H. (ed.)
    Tomato Yellow Leaf Curl Virus Disease. Management, Molecular Biology, Breeding for
    Resistance. Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 85–118.
Adkins, S., Wintermantel, W.M., Momol, T. and Polston, J.E. (2012) Management of
    ­important viral diseases. In: Davis, R.M., Pernezny, K. and Broome, J.C. (eds) Tomato
     Health Management. APS Press, St Paul, Minnesota, pp. 113–125.
Aghdak, P., Mobli, M. and Khoshgoftarmanesh, A.H. (2016) Effects of different
     growing media on vegetative and reproductive growth of bell pepper. Journal of
     Plant Nutrients 39, 967–973.
Alvarado, P., Balta, O. and Alomar, O. (1997) Efficiency of four heteroptera as predators
     of Aphis gossypii and Macrosiphum euphorbiae (Hom.: Aphididae). Entomophaga 42,
     215–226.
Alvarez, A. (2005) Diversity and diagnosis of Ralstonia solanacearum. In: Allen, C., Prior, P.
     and Hayward, A.C. (eds) Bacterial Wilt Disease and the Ralstonia solanacearum Species
     Complex. APS Press, St Paul, Minnesota, pp. 437–447.
Andrus, C.F., Reynard, G.B. and Wade, B.L. (1942) Relative resistance of tomato var-
     ieties, selections and crosses to defoliation by Alternaria and Stemphylium. US
     Department of Agriculture (USDA) Circular 652.
Arnó, J., Alonso, E. and Gabarra, R. (2003) Role of the parasitoid Diglyphus isaea
     (Walker) and the predator Macrolophus caliginosus Wagner in the control of leaf-
     miners. IOBC/wprs 26, 79–84.
Arnó, J., Albajes, R. and Gabarra, R. (2006) Within-plant distribution and sampling
     of single and mixed infestations of Bemisia tabaci and Trialeurodes vaporariorum
     (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) in winter tomato crops. Journal of Economic Entomology
     99, 331–340.
Arora, R.K., Sharma, S. and Singh, B.P. (2014) Late blight disease of potato and its
     management. Potato Journal 41, 16–40.
Aycock, R. (1966) Stem Rot and Other Diseases Caused by Sclerotium rolfsii or the Status
     of Rolfs’ Fungus after 70 Years. Technical Bulletin 174. North Carolina Agriculture
     Experiment Station, Raleigh, North Carolina.
Back, M.A., Haydock, P.P.J. and Jenkinson, P. (2002) Disease complexes involving plant
     parasitic nematodes and soilborne pathogens. Plant Pathology 51, 683–697.
Barbosa, P. (1998) Conservation Biological Control. Academic Press, San Diego, California.
Bashi, E., Pilowski ,M. and Rogem, J. (1973) Resistance in tomatoes to Stemphylium floi-
     danum and S. botryosum f.sp. lycopersici. Phytopathology 63, 1542–1544.
Baxter, A.P., Van der Westhuizen, G.C.A. and Eicker, A. (1985) A review of literature
     on the taxonomy, morphology and biology of the fungal genus Colletotrichum.
     Phytophylactica 17, 15–18.
Becktell, M.C., Daughtrey, M.L. and Fry, W.E. (2005) Epidemiology and management of
     petunia and tomato late blight in the greenhouse. Plant Disease 89, 1000–1008.
Bender, C.G. and Shoemaker, P.B. (1984) Prevalence of Verticillium wilt of tomato
     and virulence of Verticillium dahliae race 1 and race 2 isolates in western North
     Carolina. Plant Disease 68, 305–309.
Blackman, R.L. and Eastop, V.F. (2000) Aphids on the World’s Crops. An Identification and
     Information Guide. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK.
248                                   G.E. Vallad et al.


Blakeman, J.P. and Hornby, D. (1966) The persistence of Colletotrichum coccodes and
     Mycosphaerella ligulicola in soil, with special reference to sclerotia and conidia.
     Transactions of the British Mycological Society 49, 227–240.
Blancard, D. and Laterrot, H. (1986) Les Stemphylia rencontres sur tomate.
     Phytopathologia Mediterranea 25, 140–144.
Bliss, F.A., Onesirosan, P.T. and Arny, D.C. (1973) Inheritance of resistance in tomato to
     target leaf spot. Phytopathology 63, 837–840.
Bosmans, L., Alvarez-Perez, S., Moerkens, R., Wittemans, L., Van Calenberg, B. et al.
     (2015) Assessment of the genetic and phenotypic diversity among rhizogenic
     Agrobacterium biovar 1 strains infecting solanaceous and cucurbit crops. FEMS
     Microbiology Ecology 91, fiv081.
Bosmans, L., Van Calenberge, B., Paeleman, A., Moerkens, R., Wittemans, L. et al.
     (2016) Efficacy of hydrogen peroxide treatment for control of hairy roots disease
     caused by rhizogenic agrobacteria. Journal of Applied Microbiology 121, 519–527.
Bosmans, L., Moerkens, R., Wittemans, L., De Mot, R., Rediers, H. and Lievens, B. (2017)
     Rhizogenic agrobacteria in hydroponic crops: epidemics, diagnostics and control.
     Plant Pathology 66(7), 1043–1053. doi: 10.1111/ppa.12687.
Broadbent, L. (1965) The epidemiology of tomato mosaic. XI. Seed transmission of
     TMV. Annals of Applied Biology 56, 177–205.
Broadbent, L. and Fletcher, J.T. (1963) The epidemiology of tomato mosaic. IV. Persistence
     of virus on clothing and greenhouse structures. Annals of Applied Biology 52,
     233–241.
Brodeur, J., Bouchard, A. and Turcotte, G. (1997) Potential of four species of preda-
     tory mites as biological control agents of the tomato russet mite, Aculops lycopersici
     (Massee) (Eriophyidae). Canadian Entomologist 129, 1–6.
Brooks, C., Nekrasov, N., Lippman, Z.B. and Van Eck, J. (2014) Efficient gene editing in
     tomato in the first generation using the clustered regularly interspaced short pal-
     indromic repeats/CRISPR-associated9 system. Plant Physiology 166, 1292–1297.
Butler, C.D. and Trumble, J.T. (2012) The potato psyllid: life history, relationship to plant
     diseases, and management strategies. Terrestrial Arthropod Reviews 5, 87–111.
Byrne, J.M., Dianese, A.C., Ji, P., Campbell, H.L., Cuppels, D.A. et al. (2005) Biological
     control of bacterial spot of tomato under field conditions at several locations in
     North America. Biological Control 32(3), 408–418.
Caballero, R. (1996) Identificación de moscas blancas. In: Hilje, L. (ed.) Metodologías
     para el Estudio y Manejo de Moscas Blancas y Geminivirus. Centro Agronómico
     Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza, Turrialba, Costa Rica, pp. 1–2.
Calvo, F.J., Bolckmans, K. and Belda, J.E. (2009) Development of a biological control-
     based Integrated Pest Management method for Bemisia tabaci for protected sweet
     pepper crops. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 133, 9–18.
Camara, M.P.S., O’Neill, N.R. and van Berkum, P. (2002) Phylogeny of Stemphylium
     spp. based on ITS and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene sequences.
     Mycologia 94, 660–672.
Capinera, J.C. (2001) Handbook of Vegetable Pests. Academic Press, San Diego, California.
Castañé, C., Arno, J., Gabarra, R. and Alomar, O. (2011) Plant damage to vegetable
     crops by zoophytophagous mirid predators. Biological Control 59, 22–29.
Chang, R.J., Ries, S.M. and Pataky, J.K. (1991) Dissermination of Clavibacter mich-
     iganensis ssp. Michiganensis by practices used to produce tomato transplants.
     Phytopathology 81, 1276–1281.
                        Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                         249


Chang, R.J., Ries, S.M. and Pataky, J.K. (1992) Local sources of Clavibacter michigan-
     ensis ssp. Michiganensis in the development of bacterial canker on tomatoes.
     Phytopathology 82, 553–560.
Cohen, S. and Nitzany, F.E. (1966) Transmission and host range of the tomato yellow
     leaf curl virus. Phytopathology 56, 1127–1131.
Cooke, L., Schepers, H., Hermansen, A., Bain, R., Bradshaw, N. et al. (2011) Epidemiology
     and integrated control of potato late blight in Europe. Potato Research 54, 183–222.
Correll, J.C., Gordon, T.R. and Elliott, V.J. (1987) Host range, specificity, and biometrical
     measurements of Leveillula taurica in California. Plant Disease 71, 248–251.
Crous, P.W. and Braun, U. (2003) Mycosphaerella and its anamorphs: 1. Names
     published in Cercospora and Passalora. CBS Biodiversity Series 1, 1–571.
     Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Csizinsky, A.A., Schuster, D.J. and Kring, J.B. (1997) Evaluation of color mulches and
     oil sprays for yield and for the control of silverleaf whitefly, Bemisia argentifolii
     (Bellows and Perring) on tomatoes. Crop Protection 16, 475–481.
Csizinsky, A.A., Schuster, D.J. and Polston, J.E. (1999) Effect of ultraviolet-reflective
     mulches on tomato yields and on the silverleaf whitefly. HortScience 34, 911–914.
Czosnek, H. and Laterrot, H. (1997) A worldwide survey of tomato yellow leaf curl vir-
     uses. Archives of Virology 142, 1391.
Denny, T.P. (2006) Plant pathogenic Ralstonia species. In: Gnanamanickam, S.S. (ed.)
     Plant-Associated Bacteria. Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 573–644.
Denny, T.P. and Hayward, A.C. (2001) Ralstonia. In: Schaad, N., Jones, J.B. and Chun,
     W. (eds) Laboratory Guide for Identification of Plant Pathogenic Bacteria, 3rd edn. APS
     Press, St Paul, Minnesota, pp. 165–189.
Desneux, N., Wajnberg, E., Wyckhuys, K.A.G., Burgio, G., Arpaia, S. et al. (2010)
     Biological invasion of European tomato crops by Tuta absoluta: ecology, geographic
     expansion and prospects for biological control. Journal of Pest Science 83, 197–215.
Dessaux, Y., Petit, A., Farrand, S.K. and Murphy, P.J. (1998) Opines and opine-like mol-
     ecules involved in plant-Rhizobiaceae interactions. In: Spaink, H.P., Kondorosi, A.
     and Hooykaas, P.J.J. (eds) The Rhizobiaceae. Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
     pp. 173–197.
Dillard, H.R. (1989) Effect of temperature, wetness duration, and inoculum density
     on infection and lesion development of Colletotrichum coccodes on tomato fruit.
     Phytopathology 79, 1063–1066.
Dillard, H.R. and Cobb, A.C. (1998) Survival of Colletotrichum coccodes in infected to-
     mato tissue and in soil. Plant Disease 82, 235–238.
Di Serio, F., Flores, R., Verhoeven, J.T.J., Li, S.-F., Pallás, V. et al. (2014) Current status of
     viroid taxonomy. Archives of Virology 159, 3467.
Dixon, L.J., Schlub, R.L., Pernezny, K. and Datnoff, L.E. (2009) Host specialization and
     phylogenetic diversity of Corynespora cassiicola. Phytopathology 99, 1015–1027.
Dobinson, K.F., Tenuta, G.K. and Lazarovits, G. (1996) Occurrence of race 2 of
     Verticillium dahliae in processing tomato fields in southwestern Ontario. Canadian
     Journal of Plant Pathology – Revue Canadienne de Phytopathologie 18, 55–58.
Dorsman, R. and van de Vrie, M. (1987) Population dynamics of the greenhouse
     whitefly on gerbera. Bulletin IOBC/WPRS 10, 46–51.
Dovas, C.I., Katis, N.I. and Avgelis, A.D. (2002) Multiplex detection of criniviruses as-
     sociated with epidemics of a yellowing disease of tomato in Greece. Plant Disease
     86, 1345–1349.
250                                  G.E. Vallad et al.


Drukker, B., Janssen, A., Ravensberg, W. and Sabelis, M.W. (1997) Improved control
     capacity of the mite predator Phytoseiulus persimilis (Acari: Phytoseiidae) on to-
     mato. Experimental and Applied Acarology 21, 507–518.
Elad, Y. and Yunis, H. (1993) Effect of microclimate and nutrients on development of
     cucumber gray mold (Botrytis cinerea). Phytoparasitica 21, 257–268.
Elad, Y., Yunis, H. and Mahrer, Y. (1988) The effect of climatic condition in polyethylene
     covered structures on gray mold disease of winter cucumbers. Applied Agricultural
     Research 3, 243–247.
Farley, J.D. (1976) Survival of Colletotrichum coccodes in soil. Phytopathology 66, 640–641.
Farr, D.F., Rossman, A.Y., Palm, M.E. and McCray, E.B. (2007) Fungal Databases.
     Systematic Botany and Mycology Laboratory, ARS, USDA. Available at: https://
     nt.ars-grin.gov/fungaldatabases/ (accessed 13 December 2016).
Fegan, M. and Prior, P. (2005) How complex is the Ralstonia solanacearum species com-
     plex? In: Allen, C., Prior, P. and Hayward, A.C. (eds) Bacterial Wilt Disease and the
     Ralstonia solanacearum Species Complex. APS Press, St Paul, Minnesota, pp. 449–461.
Fraser, R.S.S. and Loughlin, S.A.R. (1982) Effects of temperature on the Tm-1 gene
     for resistance to Tobacco mosaic virus in tomato. Physiological Plant Pathology 20,
     109–117.
Fry, W.E., Myers, K., Roberts, P., McGrath, M.T., Everts, K. et al. (2013) The 2009 late
     blight pandemic in the eastern United States – causes and results. Plant Disease 97,
     296–306.
Furtado, I.P., de Moraes, G.J., Kreiter, S., Tixier, M.S. and Knapp, M. (2007) Potential of
     a Brazilian population of the predatory mite Phytoseiulus longipes as a biological
     control agent of Tetranychus evansi (Acari: Phytoselidae: Tetranychidae). Biological
     Control 42, 139–147.
Gale, L.R., Katan, T. and Kistler, H.C. (2003) The probable center of origin of Fusarium
     oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici VCG 0033. Plant Disease 87, 1433–1438.
Gao, Y., Lei, Z. and Reitz, S.R. (2012) Western flower thrips resistance to insecticides:
     detection, mechanisms and management strategies. Pest Management Science 68,
     1111–1121.
Gardner, R.G. and Panthee, D.R. (2012) ‘Mountain Magic’: an early blight and late
     blight-resistant specialty type F1 hybrid tomato. HortScience 47, 299–300.
Gerling, D., Alomar, O. and Arno, J. (2001) Biological control of Bemisia tabaci using
     predators and parasitoids. Crop Protection 20, 779–799.
Gillespie, D.R. and Menzies, J.G. (1993) Fungus gnats vector Fusarium oxysporum f. sp.
     radicis-lycopersici. Annals of Applied Biology 123, 539–544.
Gleason, M.L., Gitaitis, R.D. and Ricker, M.D. (1993) Recent progress in understanding
     and controlling bacterial canker of tomato in Eastern North America. Plant Disease
     77, 1069–1076.
Graves, A.S., and Alexander, S.A. (2002) Managing bacterial speck and spot of to-
     mato with acibenzolar-S-methyl in Virginia. Online. Plant Health Progress. doi:
     10.1094/PHP-2002-0220-01-RS. Available at: https://www.plantmanagement-
     network.org/pub/php/research/speckspot (accessed 20 January 2018).
Greenberg, S.M., Jones, W.A. and Liu, T.X. (2002) Interactions among two species of
     Eretmocerus (Hymenoptera: Aphelinidae), two species of whiteflies (Homoptera:
     Aleyrodidae), and tomato. Environmental Entomology 31, 397–402.
Hall, T.J. (1980) Resistance at the TM-2 locus in the tomato to Tomato mosaic virus.
     Euphytica 29, 189.
                       Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                        251


Hammond, R.W. and Owens, R.A. (2006) Viroids: New and Continuing Risks for
      Horticultural and Agricultural Crops. Online. APSnet Features. doi: 10.1094/
      APSnetFeature-2006-1106.
Hannon, C.I. and Weber, G.F. (1955) A leaf spot of tomato caused by Stemphylium flor-
      idanum sp. nov. Phytopathology 45, 11–16.
Hansen, D.L., Brødsgaard, H.F. and Enkegaard, A. (1999) Life table characteris-
      tics of Macrolophus caliginosus preying upon Tetranychus urticae. Entomologia
      Experimentalis et Applicata 93, 269–275.
Hanssen, I.M., Mumford, R., Blystad, D.R., Cortez, I., Hasiow-Jaroszewska, B., et al.
      (2010) Seed transmission of Pepino mosaic virus in tomato. European Journal of
      Plant Pathology 126, 145–152.
Hartman, J.R. and Fletcher, J.T. (1991) Fusarium crown and root rot of tomatoes in the
      UK. Plant Pathology 40, 85–92.
Hausbeck, M.K., Bell, J., Medina-Mora, C., Podolsky, R. and Fulbright, D.W. (2000)
      Effect of bactericides on population sizes and spread of Clavibacter michiganensis
      subsp. michiganensis on tomatoes in the greenhouse and on disease development
      and crop yield in the field. Phytopathology 90, 38–44.
Hendrix, J.W. and Frazier, W.A. (1949) Studies on the Inheritance of Stemphylium
      Resistance in Tomatoes. Technical Bulletin 8. Hawaii Agricultural Experiment
      Station, University of Hawaii, Honolulu.
Horvath, D.M., Stall, R.E., Jones, J.B., Pauly, M.H., Vallad, G.E. et al. (2012) Transgenic
      resistance confers effective field level control of bacterial spot disease in tomato.
      PLoS One 7(8), e42036.
Huang, C.-H., Vallad, G.E., Zhang, S., Wen, A., Balogh, B. et al. (2012) Effect of appli-
      cation frequency and reduced rates of acibenzolar-S-methyl on the field efficacy of
      induced resistance against bacterial spot on tomato. Plant Disease 96, 221–227.
Huang, N.X., Enkegaard, A., Osborne, L.S., Ramakers, P.M.J., Messelink, G.J., Pijnakker, J. and
      Murphy, G. (2011) The banker plant method in biological control. Critical Reviews
      in Plant Sciences 30, 259–278.
Hussey, N.W. and Bravenboer, L. (1971) Control of pests in glasshouse culture by the
      introduction of natural enemies. In: Huffaker, C.B. (ed.) Biological Control. Plenum
      Press, New York, pp. 195–216.
Itaya, A., Folimonov, A., Matsuda, Y., Nelson, R.S. and Ding, B. (2001) Potato spindle
      tuber viroid as inducer of RNA silencing in infected tomato. Molecular Plant–Microbe
      Interactions 14, 1332–1334.
Jacquet, M., Bongiovanni, M., Martinez, M., Verschave, P., Wajnberg, E. and Castagnone-
      Sereno, P. (2005) Variation in resistance to the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne in-
      cognita in tomato genotypes bearing the Mi gene. Plant Pathology 54, 93–99.
Jarvis, W.R. (1988) Fusarium crown and root rot of tomatoes. Phytoprotection 69,
      49–64.
Ji, P., Campbell, H.L., Kloepper, J.W., Jones, J.B., Suslow, T.V. and Wilson, M. (2006)
      Integrated biological control of bacterial speck and spot of tomato under field con-
      ditions using foliar biological control agents and plant growth-promoting rhizo-
      bacteria. Biological Control 36(3), 358–367.
Jones, H., Whipps, J.M. and Gurr, S.J. (2001) The tomato powdery mildew fungus
      Oidium neolycopersici. Molecular Plant Pathology 2, 303–309.
Jones, J.B., Jones, J.P., Stall, J.P. and Zitter, T.A. (1991) Compendium of Tomato Diseases.
      American Phytopathological Society, St Paul, Minnesota.
252                                     G.E. Vallad et al.


Jones, J.B., Lacy, G.H., Bouzar, H., Stall, R.E. and Schaad, N.W. (2004) Reclassification
      of the xanthomonads associated with bacterial spot disease of tomato and pepper.
      Systematic and Applied Microbiology 27(6), 755–762.
Jones, J.B., Lacy, G.H., Bouzar, H., Minsavage, G.V., Stall, R.E. and Schaad, N.W. (2005)
      Bacterial spot – worldwide distribution, importance and review. Acta Horticulturae
      695, 27–34.
Kamoun, S. and Smart, C.D. (2005) Late blight of potato and tomato in the genomics
      era. Plant Disease 89, 692–699.
Katan, T., Shlevin, E. and Katan, J. (1997) Sporulation of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lyco-
      persici on stem surfaces of tomato plants and aerial dissemination of inoculum.
      Phytopathology 87, 712–719.
Kiss, L., Cook, R.T.A., Saenz, G.S., Cunnington, J.H., Takamatsu, S. et al. (2001) Identification
      of two powdery mildew fungi, Oidium neolycopersici sp. nov. and O. lycopersici, infecting
      tomato in different parts of the world. Mycological Research 105, 684–697.
Klosterman, S.J., Atallah, Z.K., Vallad, G.E. and Subbarao, K.V. (2009) Diversity, patho-
      genicity, and management of Verticillium species. Annual Review of Phytopathology
      47, 39–62.
Koller, M., Knapp, M. and Schausberger, P. (2007) Direct and indirect adverse effects of
      tomato on the predatory mite Neoseiulus californicus feeding on the spider mite
      Tetranychus evansi. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 125, 297–305.
Labate, J.A., Robertson, L.D., Strickler, S.R. and Mueller, L.A. (2014). Genetic structure
      of the four wild tomato species in the Solanum peruvianum s.l. species complex.
      Genome 57, 169–180.
Lanter, J.M., McGuire, J.M. and Goode, M.J. (1982) Persistence of Tomato mosaic virus in
      tomato debris and soil under field conditions. Plant Disease 66, 552–555.
Lapidot, M. and Friedmann, M. (2002) Breeding for resistance to whitefly-transmitted
      geminiviruses. Annals of Applied Biology 140, 109–127.
Lapidot, M. and Polston, J.E. (2010) Biology and epidemiology of Bemisia-vectored viruses.
      In: Stansly, P.A. and Naranjo, S.E. (eds) Bemisia: Bionomics and Management of a Global
      Pest. Springer Science and Business Media, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp.227–231.
Lapidot, M., Friedmann, M., Lachman, O., Yehezkel, A., Nahon, S., Cohen, S. and
      Pilowsky, M. (1997) Comparison of resistance level to tomato yellow leaf curl virus
      among commercial cultivars and breeding lines. Plant Disease 81, 1425–1428.
Lefeuvre, P., Martin, D.P., Harkins, G., Lemey, P., Gray, A.J.A. et al. (2010) The spread
      of tomato yellow leaf curl virus from the Middle East to the World. PLoS Pathogens
      6(10), e1001164.
Levy, J., Ravindran, A., Gross, D., Tambrindeguy, C. and Pierson, E. (2011) Translocation
      of ‘Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum’, the Zebra Chip pathogen, in potato
      and tomato. Phytopathology 101, 1285–1291.
Li, T., Liu, B., Spalding, M.H., Weeks, D.P. and Yang, B. (2012) High-efficiency TALEN-
      based gene editing produces disease-resistant rice. Nature Biotechnology 30,
      390–392.
Liefting, L., Weir, B., Pennycook, S. and Clover, G. (2009) ‘Candidatus Liberibacter sola-
      nacearum’, associated with plants in the family Solanaceae. International Journal of
      Systemic and Evolutionary Microbiology 59(9), 2274–2276.
Lin, H., Lou, B., Glynn, J.M., Doddapaneni, H., Civerolo, E.L. et al. (2011) The complete
      genome sequence of ‘Candidatus liberibacter solanacearum’, the bacterium asso-
      ciated with potato zebra chip disease. PLoS One 6(4), e19135.
                      Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                      253


Lindström, K. and Young, J.P.W. (2011) International Committee on Systematics of
      Prokaryotes. Subcommittee on the taxonomy of Agrobacterium and Rhizobium:
      minutes of the meeting, 7 September 2010, Geneva, Switzerland. International
      Journal of Systemic and Evolutionary Microbiology 61, 3089–3093.
Ling, K.S. (2008) Pepino mosaic virus on tomato seed: virus location and mechanical
      transmission. Plant Disease 92, 1701–1705.
List, G.M. (1939) The effect of temperature upon egg deposition, egg hatch and nymphal
      development of Paratrioza cockerelli. Journal of Economic Entomology 32, 30–36.
Louws, F.J., Wilson, M., Campbell, H.L., Cuppels, D.A., Jones, J.B. et al. (2001) Field con-
      trol of bacterial spot and bacterial speck of tomato using a plant activator. Plant
      Disease 85, 481–488.
Ma, X., Lewis Ivey, M.L. and Miller, S.A. (2011) First report of Xanthomonas gard-
      neri causing bacterial spot of tomato in Ohio and Michigan. Plant Disease 95,
      1584.
Martin, H.L., Hamilton, V.A. and Kopittke, R.A. (2004) Copper tolerance in Australian
      populations of Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria contributes to poor field con-
      trol of bacterial spot of pepper. Plant Disease 88, 921–924.
McCarter, S.M., Jones, J.B., Gitaitis, R.D. and Smitley, D.R. (1983) Survival of
      Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato in association with tomato seed, soil, host tissue,
      and epiphytic weed hosts in Georgia. Phytopathology 73, 1393–1398.
Menzies, J.G. and Jarvis, W.R. (1994) The infestation of tomato seed by Fusarium
      oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici. Plant Pathology 43, 378–386.
Menzies, J.G., Koch, C. and Seywerd, F. (1990) Additions to the host ranges of Fusarium
      oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici. Plant Disease 74, 569–572.
Messelink, G.J., van Maanen, R., van Steenpaal, S.E.F. and Janssen, A. (2008) Biological
      control of thrips and whiteflies by a shared predator: two pests are better than one.
      Biological Control 44, 372–379.
Messelink, G.J., Sabelis, M.W. and Janssen, A. (2012) Generalist predators, food web
      complexities and biological pest control in greenhouse crops. In: Larramendy, M.L.
      and Soloneski, S. (eds) Integrated Pest Management and Pest Control – Current and
      Future Tactics. InTech, Rijeka, pp. 191–214.
Minkenberg, O.P.J.M. (1990) Reproduction of Dacnusa sibirica (Hymenoptera,
      Braconidae), an endoparasitoid of leafminer Liriomyza bryoniae (Diptera,
      Agromyzidae) on tomatoes, at constant temperatures. Environmental Entomology
      19, 625–629.
Nasehi, A., Kadir, J.B., Esfahani, M.N., Mahmodi, F., Golkhandan, E., Akter, S. and
      Ghadirian, H. (2014) Cultural and physiological characteristics of Stemphylium
      lycopersici causing leaf blight disease on vegetable crops. Archives of Phytopathology
      and Plant Protection 47, 1658–1665.
Navot, N., Pichersky, E., Zeidan, M., Zamir, D. and Czosnek, H. (1991) Tomato yellow leaf
      curl virus: a whitefly-transmitted geminivirus with a single genomic component.
      Virology 185, 151–161.
Noling, J. and Ferris, H. (2012) Management of parasitic nematodes. In: Davis, R.M.,
      Pernezny, K. and Broome, J.C. (eds) Tomato Health Management. APS Press, St Paul,
      Minnesota, pp. 65–76.
Nowicki, M., Foolad, M.R., Nowakowska, M. and Kozik, E.U. (2012) Potato and tomato
      late blight caused by Phytophthora infestans: an overview of pathology and resist-
      ance breeding. Plant Disease 96, 4–17.
254                                  G.E. Vallad et al.


Nunez, J. (2012) Management of important soilborne diseases. In: Davis, R.M.,
     Pernezny, K. and Broome, J.C. (eds) Tomato Health Management. APS Press, St Paul,
     Minnesota, pp. 95–101.
Obradovic, A., Jones, J.B., Momol, M.T., Balogh, B. and Olson, S.M. (2004) Management
     of tomato bacterial spot in the field by foliar applications of bacteriophages and
     SAR inducers. Plant Disease 88, 736–740.
Onesirosan, P.T., Arny, D.C. and Durbin, R.D. (1974) Host specificity of Nigerian and
     North American isolates of Corynespora cassiicola. Phytopathology 64, 1364–1367.
Owens, R.A. and Verhoeven, J.T.J. (2009) Potato spindle tuber. The Plant Health
     Instructor (American Phytopathology Society, St Paul, Minnesota). doi: 10.1094/
     PHI-I-l-2009-0804-01. Available at: https://www.apsnet.org/edcenter/intropp/
     lessons/viruses/Pages/PotatoSpindleTuber.aspx (accessed 22 April 2018).
Pappu, H.R., Jones, R.A.C. and Jain, R.K. (2009) Global status of tospovirus epidemics
     in diverse cropping systems: successes achieved and challenges ahead. Virus
     Research 141, 219–236.
Patterson, C.L. (1991) Importance of chlamydospores as primary inoculum for
     Alternaria solani, incitant of collar rot and early blight on tomato. Plant Disease 75,
     274–278.
Pearson, M.N., Clover, G.R.G., Guy, P.L., Fletcher, J.D. and Beever, R.E. (2006) A review
     of the plant virus, viroid and mollicute records for New Zealand. Australasian Plant
     Pathology 35, 217–252.
Perdikis, D., Fantinou, A. and Lykouressis, D. (2011) Enhancing pest control in annual
     crops by conservation of predatory Heteroptera. Biological Control 59, 13–21.
Pico, B., Diez, M. and Nuez, F. (1996) Viral diseases causing the greatest economic
     losses to the tomato crop. 2. The Tomato yellow leaf curl virus – a review. Scientia
     Horticulturae 67, 151–196.
Poland, J.A. and Rife, T.W. (2012) Genotyping-by-sequencing for plant breeding and
     genetics. Plant Genome 5, 92–102.
Potnis, N., Timilsina, S., Strayer, A., Shantharaj, D., Barak, J.D. et al. (2015) Bacterial
     spot of tomato and pepper: diverse Xanthomonas species with a wide variety of viru-
     lence factors posing a worldwide challenge. Molecular Plant Pathology 16, 907–920.
Pozos, N., Scow, K., Wuertz, S. and Darby, J. (2004) UV disinfection in a model distri-
     bution system: biofilm growth and microbial community. Water Research 38,
     3083–3091.
Prior, P. and Fegan, M. (2005) Recent developments in the phylogeny and classification
     of Ralstonia solanacearum. Acta Horticulturae 695, 127–136.
Pritchard, F.J. and Porte, W.S. (1924) The relation of temperature and humidity to to-
     mato leaf spot (Septoria lycopersici Speg.). Phytopathology 14, 156–165.
Punja, Z.K. (1985) The biology, ecology, and control of Sclerotium rolfsii. Annual Review
     of Phytopathology 23, 97–127.
Quezado-Duval, A.M., Leite Júnior, R.P., Truffi, D. and Camargo, L.E.A. (2004)
     Outbreaks of bacterial spot caused by Xanthomonas gardneri on processing tomato
     in Central-West Brasil. Plant Disease 88, 157–161.
Rekah, Y., Shtienberg, D. and Katan, J. (1999) Spatial distribution and temporal devel-
     opment of Fusarium crown and root rot of tomato and pathogen dissemination in
     field soil. Phytopathology 89, 831–839.
Ritchie, D.R. and Dittapongpitch, V. (1991) Copper- and streptomycin-resistant strains
     and host differentiated races of Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria in North
     Carolina. Plant Disease 75, 733–736.
                      Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                      255


Riudavets, J. and Castañé, C. (1998) Identification and evaluation of native pred-
      ators of Frankliniella occidentalis (Thysanoptera : Thripidae) in the Mediterranean.
      Environmental Entomology 27, 86–93.
Rivard, C.L., O’Connell, S., Peet, M.M., Welker, R.M. and Louws, F.J. (2012) Grafting
      tomato to manage bacterial wilt caused by Ralstonia solanacearum in the southeast-
      ern United States. Plant Disease 96, 973–978.
Rivas, S. and Thomas, C.M. (2002) Recent advances in the study of tomato Cf resistance
      genes. Molecular Plant Pathology 3, 277–282.
Rodrigues, T., Berbee, M., Simmons, E., Cardoso, C., Reis, A., Maffia, L. and Mizubuti, E.
      (2010) First report of Alternaria tomatophila and A. grandis causing early blight on
      tomato and potato in Brazil. New Disease Reports 22, 28.
Roossinck, M.J. (1999) Cucumoviruses (Bromoviridae). In: Granoff, A. and Webster, R.G.
      (eds) Encyclopedia of Virology. Academic Press, San Diego, California, pp. 315–324.
Roselló, S., José Díez, M. and Nuez, F. (1996) Viral diseases causing the greatest eco-
      nomic losses to the tomato crop. I. The Tomato spotted wilt virus – a review. Scientia
      Horticulturae 67, 117–150.
Rotem, J. and Bashi, E. (1977) A review of the present status of the Stemphylium com-
      plex in tomato foliage. Phytoparasitica 5, 45–58.
Rowe, R.C., Farley, J.D. and Coplin, D.L. (1977) Airborne spore dispersal and recoloniza-
      tion of steamed soil by Fusarium oxysporum in tomato greenhouses. Phytopathology
      67, 1513–1517.
Saidi, M. and Warade, S.D. (2008) Tomato breeding for resistance to Tomato spotted
      wilt virus (TSWV): an overview of conventional and molecular approaches. Czech
      Journal of Genetics and Plant Breeding 44, 83–92.
Sanchez, J.A., Gillespie, D.R. and McGregor, R.R. (2003) The effects of mullein plants
      (Verbascum thapsus) on the population dynamics of Dicyphus hesperus (Heteroptera:
      Miridae) in tomato greenhouses. Biological Control 28, 313–319.
Schenk, M.F., Hamelink, R., van der Vlugt, R.A.A., Vermunt, A.M.W., Kaarsenmaker, R.C.
      and Stijger, I. (2010) The use of attenuated isolates of Pepino mosaic virus for
      cross-protection. European Journal of Plant Pathology 127, 249–261.
Schuster, D.J. (2001) Relationship of silverleaf whitefly population density to severity of
      irregular ripening of tomato. HortScience 36, 1089–1090.
Secor, G.A., Rivera, V.V., Abad, J.A., Lee, I.-M., Clover, G.R.G. et al. (2009) Association
      of ‘Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum’ with zebra chip disease of potato es-
      tablished by graft and psyllid transmission, electron microscopy, and PCR. Plant
      Disease 93, 574–583.
Simmons, E.G. (2000) Alternaria themes and variations (244-286) species on
      Solanaceae. Mycotaxon 75, 1–115.
Speyer, E.R. (1927) An important parasite of the greenhouse whitefly (Trialeurodes
      vaporariorum, Westwood). Bulletin of Entomological Research 17, 301–308.
Stall, R.E., Hortenstine, C.C. and Iley, J.R. (1965) Incidence of botrytis gray mold of to-
      mato in relation to a calcium–phosphorus balance. Phytopathology 55, 447–449.
Stall, R.E., Jones, J.B. and Minsavage, G.V. (2009) Durability of resistance in tomato and
      pepper to xanthomonads causing bacterial spot. Annual Review of Phytopathology
      47, 265–284.
Tancos, M.A., Chalupowicz, L., Barash, I., Manulis-Sasson, S. and Smart, C.D. (2013)
      Tomato fruit and seed colonization by Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganen-
      sis through external and internal routes. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
      79, 6948–6957.
256                                   G.E. Vallad et al.


The 100 Tomato Genome Sequencing Consortium (2014) Exploring genetic variation
     in the tomato (Solanum section Lycopersicum) clade by whole-genome sequencing.
     The Plant Journal 80, 136–168.
The Tomato Genome Consortium (TGC) (2012) The tomato genome sequence provides in-
     sights into fleshy fruit evolution. Nature 485, 635–641. doi: 10.1038/nature11119.
Thompson, W.M.O. (2011) Introduction: Whiteflies, geminiviruses and recent events.
     In: Thompson, W.M.O. (ed.) The Whitefly, Bemisia tabaci (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae)
     Interaction with GeminiVirus-Infected Host Plants. Springer, Berlin, pp. 1–13.
Urbaneja-Bernat, P., Alonso, M., Tena, A., Bolckmans, K. and Urbaneja, A. (2012)
     Sugar as nutritional supplement for the zoophytophagous predator Nesidiocoris
     tenuis. BioControl 58, 57–64. doi: 10.1007/s10526-012-9466-y.
Vandekerkhove, B. and De Clercq, P. (2010) Pollen as an alternative or supplementary
     food for the mirid predator Macrolophus pygmaeus. Biological Control 53, 238–242.
van Houten, Y.M., Glas, J.J., Hoogerbrugge, H., Rothe, J., Bolckmans, K.J. et al. (2013)
     Herbivory-associated degradation of tomato trichomes and its impact on biological
     control of Aculops lycopersici. Experimental and Applied Acarology 60(2), 127–138.
van Lenteren, J.C. (2012) The state of commercial augmentative biological control:
     plenty of natural enemies, but a frustrating lack of uptake. BioControl 57, 1–20.
van Lenteren, J.C. and Woets, J. (1988) Biological and integrated pest control in green-
     houses. Annual Review of Entomology 33, 239–269.
van Maanen, R., Vila, E., Sabelis, M.W. and Janssen, A. (2010) Biological control of
     broad mites (Polyphagotarsonemus latus) with the generalist predator Amblyseius
     swirskii. Experimental and Applied Acarology 52, 29–34.
Varma, A., Mandal, B. and Singh, M.K. (2011) Global emergence and spread of whitefly
     transmitted geminiviruses. In: Thompson, W.M.O. (ed.) The Whitefly, Bemisia
     tabaci (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) Interaction with Geminivirus-Infected Host Plants.
     Springer Science and Business Media, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 205–292.
Verhoeff, K. (1968) Effect of soil nitrogen level and methods of deleafing upon the oc-
     currence of Botrytis cinerea under commercial conditions. Netherlands Journal of
     Plant Pathology 74, 184–194.
Verhoeven, J., Jansen, C., Willemen, T., Kox, L.F.F., Owens, R.A. and Roenhorst J.W.
     (2004) Natural infections of tomato by Citrus exocortis viroid, Columnea latent
     viroid, Potato spindle tuber viroid and Tomato chlorotic dwarf viroid. European Journal
     of Plant Pathology 110, 823.
Verhoeven, J.T.J., Hüner, L., Marn, M.V., Mavric Plesko, I. and Roenhorst, J.W. (2010)
     Mechanical transmission of Potato spindle tuber viroid between plants of Brugmansia
     suaveoles, Solanum jasminoides and potatoes and tomatoes. European Journal of Plant
     Pathology 128, 417.
Voigt, D., Gorb, E. and Gorb, S. (2007) Plant surface–bug interactions: Dicyphus errans
     stalking along trichomes. Arthropod–Plant Interactions 1, 221–243.
Weber, G.F. (1930) Gray leaf spot of tomato caused by Stemphylium solani, sp. nov.
     Phytopathology 20, 513–518.
Webster, C.G., Frantz, G., Reitz, S.R., Funderburk, J.E., Mellinger, H.C. et al. (2015)
     Emergence of Groundnut ringspot virus and Tomato chlorotic spot virus in vegetables
     in Florida and the southeastern United States. Phytopathology 105, 388–398.
Weir, T.L., Huff, D.R., Christ, B.J. and Romaine, C.P. (1998) RAPD-PCR analysis of gen-
     etic variation among isolates of Alternaria solani and Alternaria alternata from po-
     tato and tomato. Mycologia 90, 813–821.
                      Crop Protection: Pest and Disease Management                      257


Weller, S.A., Stead, D.E. and Young, J.P.W. (2006) Recurrent outbreaks of root mat
      in cucumber and tomato are associated with a monomorphic, cucumopine,
      Ri-plasmid harboured by various Alphaproteobacteria. FEMS Microbiology Letters
      258, 136–143.
Wetzel, M.E., Kim, K.S., Miller, M., Olsen, G.J. and Farrand, S.K. (2014) Quorum-
      dependent mannopine-inducible conjugative transfer of an Agrobacterium
      opine-catabolic plasmid. Journal of Bacteriology 196,1031–1044.
Williamson, V.M. (1998) Root-knot nematode resistance genes in tomato and their po-
      tential for future use. Annual Review of Phytopathology 36, 277–293.
Wilson, A.R. (1963) Some observations on the infection of tomato stems by Botrytis
      cinerea Fr. Annals of Applied Biology 51, 171.
Xu, X., Miller, S.A., Baysal-Gurel, F., Gartemann, K.-H., Eichenlaub, R. and Rajashekara, G.
      (2010) Bioluminescence imaging of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis
      infection of tomato seeds and plants. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 76,
      3978–3988.
Yang, T.-C. and Chi, H. (2006) Life tables and development of Bemisia argentifolii at dif-
      ferent temperatures. Journal of Economic Entomology 99, 691–698.
Yunis, H., Elad, Y. and Mahrer, Y. (1990a) Effects of air temperature, relative hu-
      midity and canopy wetness on gray mold of cucumbers in unheated greenhouses.
      Phytoparasitica 18, 203–215.
Yunis, H., Elad, Y. and Mahrer, Y. (1990b) Influence of fungicide control of cucumber
      and tomato grey mold (Botrytis cinerea) on fruit yield. Pesticide Science 31,
      325–335.
Zaitlin, M. and Hull, R. (1987) Plant virus–host interactions. Annual Review of Plant
      Physiology 38, 291–315.
