                                     9
          Greenhouse Tomato Production
              Cheiri Kubota, Arie de Gelder and Mary M. Peet




GREENHOUSE INDUSTRY OVERVIEW

Although definitive numbers are not available, the greenhouse area used for
the production of vegetables worldwide has been increasing over the years. In
comparing different geographical areas, large differences are seen in climatic
conditions (light intensity and temperature), greenhouse design and equip-
ment, as well as technical expertise (Montero et al., 2011). This results in yield
differences between regions. While it might be expected that regions with
higher light would have higher production, the level of greenhouse technology
utilized is often a more important factor. For example, average tomato yields in
Almeria, Spain, are far lower (28 kg/m2) than in The Netherlands or Canada
(60 kg/m2) (see Chapter 1), even though the daily light sum or daily light in-
tegral (DLI) is on average 5 times higher in winter and 60% higher on an an-
nual basis in Spain than in The Netherlands (Costa and Heuvelink, 2000). This
difference is partly caused by a difference in cropping season. In Almeria, the
temperature in summer is too high for balanced crop growth and good product
quality of tomatoes, therefore greenhouses are left empty in summer. On the
other hand, in arid or semi-arid regions such as Mexico and south-western USA,
tomatoes are grown very successfully in summer in greenhouses equipped
with advanced climate control technology. Differences in yield between regions
are also due to cultivar choice. For ­example, pink-type cultivars grown widely
in Japan have been shown to be less productive than modern Dutch cultivars.
The average annual greenhouse tomato yield has reportedly doubled from 30
kg/m2 in the 1980s to 60 kg/m2 in 2005 in The Netherlands (Higashide and
Heuvelink, 2009). More recently a yield level of 100 kg/m2 was anecdotally
reached in south-western USA in a high-tech, semi-closed greenhouse by com-
bining crop scheduling and advanced environmental control. This remarkable
achievement is due to both technology ­advancements in controlled environ-
ment and the use of special cultivars that are highly productive and especially
bred for greenhouse cultivation (Higashide and Heuvelink, 2009).


276                      © CAB International 2018. Tomatoes 2nd edition (E. Heuvelink)
                          Greenhouse Tomato Production                       277


     More recently, along with increasing interest in urban farming, green-
houses have now been erected in metropolitan areas such as New York City.
Rooftop greenhouses, once considered economically impractical, are now suc-
cessfully operating and attracting consumers who appreciate locally produced
food. Entrepreneurs and academia are examining the feasibility of tomato pro-
duction inside warehouses equipped with modern artificial lighting (i.e. ‘plant
factories’), but the economics of such production systems need to be further
investigated under various scenarios.
     Special cultivars exist for tomato production in greenhouses. The large
red multi-locular ‘beefsteak’ type tomato with an indeterminate growth habit
is the industry standard in North America. However, this cultivar type is no
longer popular in North American greenhouses, due to competition from open
field production. Cluster tomatoes or on-the-vine tomatoes (TOV) are now the
common types produced in North American greenhouses (Fig. 9.1). Smaller
two- to three-locule round fruits (47–65 mm) or cherry tomatoes (< 15 mm),
nearly all cluster types, are the most common types grown in Europe. There is
also a market for large fruit, which may replace smaller fruits as market trends
change. Attributes for cluster types include uniformity of fruit size, harvesting
the entire truss at once, simultaneous ripening of all the fruit on the truss and
fruit remaining on the vine/truss after harvest.
     Heirloom tomato varieties are grown in greenhouses for niche markets
in North America, though scale of production is still small. They are open-­
pollinated and maintained for many generations among farmers in Europe
and North America. They exhibit large variations in colour, flavour, shape and
other traits. Many of these cultivars are not as productive as the widely used
commercial hybrids but they are richer in flavour, creating specialized markets
in retail and restaurants.


GREENHOUSE STRUCTURES AND SYSTEMS

Structure types and orientations

Greenhouses have been developed to protect the crop from ‘hostile’ weather
conditions such as low temperatures, frost, wind, rain, hail or snow. Tomatoes
can be grown in every type of greenhouse, provided it is high enough to train
the plants vertically. Tunnels covered with plastic films are widely used as low-
cost structures, typically for seasonal production. In many countries world-
wide, the Dutch so-called Venlo type of glasshouse is now used (Atherton and
Rudich, 1986; Teitel et al., 2012). At the same time, many countries have their
own greenhouse types with different dimensions, structures and coverings
(Montero et al., 2011). For example, a typical Chinese greenhouse (solar green-
house) consists of short north–south oriented raised beds inside the east–west
oriented lean-to structure with the north-side wall made of soil and/or bricks.
278                                 C. Kubota et al.


      (a)




                                                Cluster type (TOV) – medium size

      (b)




                                                Cluster type (TOV) – mini Roma
      (c)




                                                Cherry type

Fig. 9.1. Various types of tomatoes grown in greenhouse: (a) cluster type (TOV),
medium size; (b) cluster type (TOV), mini Roma; (c) cherry type. (Photographs:
Chieri Kubota.)

In southern Spain, flat-roof greenhouses covered by single-layer polyethylene
film (‘parral’ greenhouses) are widely used. In Israel and Mexico, where tem-
peratures are generally higher, screen houses are common and effectively used
for tomato production.
      The frames of modern Dutch-style greenhouses are generally made of alu-
minum or galvanized steel. More traditional and older or smaller greenhouses
as well as high tunnels may be wood-framed. The shape of greenhouses used for
tomato cultivation (Fig. 9.2) varies depending on several factors, such as: (i) the
weight of the tomato plants on the wire; (ii) expected snow load; (iii) amount of
natural ventilation required; (iv) place of vents (roof or side); (v) whether the
bays are stand-alone or joined at the gutters; (vi) type of covering (glass or plastic);
(vii) growing system; (viii) use of screens; and (ix) use of artificial lighting, etc.
                          Greenhouse Tomato Production                         279



(a)




(b)




      (c)

                                              Fig. 9.2. Shapes of greenhouse
                                              frames: (a) gutter-connected
                                              straight sidewall with arch roof;
                                              (b) ridge-and-furrow style straight
                                              sidewall with gable roof; (c) hoop
                                              or quonset style; (d) Gothic-arch
      (d)                                     frame.


Sidewall and support column height has been increasing, and in modern
Venlo-type greenhouses ranges from 3.5 m to 7 m. High sidewalls and support
columns allow for a taller crop and for more climate control equipment to be
installed above the crop, such as horizontal airflow fans, energy screens, shade
screens, fogging, lighting and heating. High sidewalls also increase the effect-
iveness of natural ventilation in greenhouses with roof venting. However, in-
creasing sidewall height may increase the heating costs in some cases, such
as in single-span greenhouses, as it increases the surface/floor area ratio.
Space near the sides can be used more efficiently with straight sidewalls than
in so-called Quonset-style structures (Fig 9.2). Gothic-arch frame structures,
which have a peak at the top but curving sides, provide adequate sidewall
height without loss of strength and can be free-standing or part of a range of
multi-span, gutter-connected units. The advantage of Gothic-arch structures
in double-polyethylene greenhouses is better runoff of condensation from the
inner layer of plastic. The runoff can be channelled outside the greenhouse,
reducing greenhouse humidity.
     Venlo-type greenhouses protect the crop against adverse weather condi-
tions and at the same time provide high light transmittance, allowing good crop
growth (Bakker et al., 1995). Venlo greenhouses typically use glass covering
but a variety of synthetic covering materials is also used.
280                               C. Kubota et al.


     The parral greenhouse, which is the standard in Almeria, Spain, consists
of a supporting structure of vertical wooden, concrete or metal posts. The lower
ends of the posts are set in the soil and their upper ends are connected by a flex-
ible wire grid. The plastic film covering material is supported by this wire grid
and is held in place by a second wire grid placed over the film. The roof pitch
varies from flat to 13 degrees. Holes are made in the plastic film along the val-
leys to allow rainwater to pass through the cover and be collected using plastic
or galvanized steel gutters. Since the cost of mechanical ventilation is unaccept-
ably high for typical parral greenhouses, they use natural ventilation. This is the
cheapest, most practical and commonly used method to ensure an acceptable
greenhouse climate during both warm and cool periods (Brugger et al., 2005)
but does not allow production in mid-summer (high temperature season).
     Greenhouse light transmission and spatial uniformity of light intensity
inside the greenhouse are important. They are affected by the direct/diffuse
ratio in the incident light as well as diffusion properties of covering mater-
ials (Hemming et al., 2008, 2016), greenhouse design (roof angle and shape,
number of spans, and amount of light intercepting structural elements), time
of day, season and location (latitude). Computer-based simulations have been
used to investigate influences of such factors on incident light intensity and dis-
tribution over the plant canopy (e.g. Gupta et al., 2012; Castellano et al., 2016).
In general, seasonal changes in greenhouse light transmission are greater at
higher latitudes. Greenhouses transmit more light (direct light) in winter when
they are oriented east–west, while north–south oriented greenhouses have a
more uniform light environment inside the greenhouse. In large, multi-span
greenhouses, optimizing for light may be less critical than optimizing for wind
direction if the greenhouse is to be naturally ventilated by roof vents. Ideally
the greenhouse is placed perpendicular to the direction of the prevailing winds
during the hottest times of the production cycle. An additional consideration is
that the distribution of shaded and non-shaded areas should be uniform over
the course of the day. Ideally, all areas of the greenhouse should receive the
same amount of light over a 24 h period in order for plant growth to be uni-
form throughout the greenhouse.


Covering materials

There are three main types of greenhouse covering: glass; rigid plastics; poly-
ethylene or other synthetic film. Film coverings can be either double or single.
In cold climates, double layers are separated by an insulating layer of air, often
continuously inflated with an air pump, usually about 10 cm thick, to conserve
energy. Modern synthetic materials can have similar or better attributes than
glass, but are often more expensive.
    Traditionally, greenhouses have been made from glass; hence the use of
the terms ‘glasshouse’. Glass maximizes photosynthetically active radiation
                            Greenhouse Tomato Production                           281


(PAR) transmission and only requires regular cleaning and sealing of the
edges. Glass also has lower transmission of long-wave radiation (3000 nm or
greater) and therefore glass provides more thermal protection than plastics.
Glass can be used in large panels, reducing structural shading (Giacomelli
and Roberts, 1993). However, glass is expensive compared with polyethylene
plastic film and some rigid plastics.
     Life expectancy of all plastics with a few exceptions (e.g. ethylene-co-tetrafluo-
roethylene (ETFE)) is reduced by extreme temperatures, dust, sand, air pollu-
tants and ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Traditional polyethylene coverings would
need to be replaced every 2–4 years to maintain acceptable light transmission.
Innovation in plastic formulations and advanced extrusion technologies has
led to high-quality greenhouse films with extended film life. Also different
types of plastic layers are combined to modify thermal properties or to reduce
condensate dripping. Near-infrared (NIR) blocking additive for plastic covering
materials, however, typically reduces the transmission of PAR and needs evalu-
ation under various conditions (e.g. Kempkes and Hemming, 2012). Some
companies also offer wavelength-selective plastics said to reduce disease or in-
sect pressure or to control plant height growth. At this time, because of their
higher cost, wavelength-selective plastics are not widely used by growers.
     Three types of coverings were compared in an experiment in Ontario,
Canada: glass, rigid synthetics and polyethylene plastic film. Tomato and cu-
cumber yields were reported to be similar under all three types of coverings
(Papadopoulos and Hao, 1997a, b). Probably other factors compensated for
the lower light level, such as more diffuse light and more favourable humidity
in summer under plastic than under glass, leading to different plant bal-
ance. Presumably light was less limiting than in earlier studies done in The
Netherlands, which compared single- and double-glass greenhouses. In these
studies, 1% light loss resulted in about 1% loss of production (Van Winden et al.,
1984). In a more recent literature study, Marcelis et al. (2006) showed that
1% less light resulted in 0.7–1% less growth and production in most green-
house vegetable crops (see also Chapter 4). Whatever the type of covering
material used, optimal light transmission should be a priority for manufac-
turers of greenhouses and greenhouse covering materials.
     Rigid plastics used for greenhouse covering include fibreglass reinforced
polyester, polycarbonate and acrylic. Some are energy efficient, have good light
transmission in the first year of usage and last at least 10 years. But rigid plas-
tics are more expensive than polyethylene films (Giacomelli and Roberts, 1993).
Acrylic and fibreglass panels deteriorate from dust more rapidly than glass and
they are fire hazards. Like glass panes, rigid plastics are strong and can be in-
stalled as large panels to reduce shading from support structures. Insulated
rigid double-walled plastic panels are sometimes used to conserve energy but
they reduce the rate of snowmelt compared with glass or plastic film. This is a
severe disadvantage in regions with snowfall, because snow ­accumulation not
only blocks the natural light but also can lead to collapse of the greenhouse.
282                                C. Kubota et al.


Double-layer polyethylene greenhouses are also energy efficient and in case of
snowfall the double layers can be deflated, to increase melting rate. Thus, in
Canada, Mexico and the USA, it is more common for new greenhouses to be
covered with a double layer of plastic film than with glass or rigid plastic panels.
In north-west Europe, use of glass is common. Double-poly houses often have
rounded roofs (Quonset-style) (Fig. 9.2), which contribute to condensate drip-
ping on to leaves. Designs with roof openings (Fig. 9.3) are available for plastic
film greenhouses as well as acrylic (Giacomelli and Roberts, 1993).
     Among recently developed covering materials, one that transforms direct
light to diffuse light without substantially reducing the transmission of global
light (diffuse plus direct light) has been evaluated. Converting direct light to dif-
fuse light can increase plant productivity in greenhouses (see also Chapter 4),
because diffuse light is non-directional and can reach deeper into the canopy
and thus increase photosynthesis of the whole plant stand (Hemming et al.,
2008, 2016; Li et al., 2014). For high-wire cucumber plants, Hemming et al.
(2008) demonstrated that yield was increased by 8–10% by applying diffusing
covering material made of ETFE in comparison with using glass. The effective-
ness of diffusing covering materials can vary regionally and is minimum in areas
with predominantly overcast skies, where the natural global light contains a
high percentage of diffuse light. Diffusing covering materials are more effective




Fig. 9.3. Plastic greenhouse with roof opening for natural ventilation. (Photograph
courtesy of Chieri Kubota.)
                            Greenhouse Tomato Production                          283


in promoting plant growth in regions with high levels of direct sunlight, such
as arid and semi-arid regions. Other new technologies recently developed and
evaluated are glass coatings that reduce reflection and hence increase the
transmission of light (i.e. anti-reflection coatings), and low-emission coatings
that reduce emissivity of long-wave radiation for energy saving (Hemming
et al., 2011). Most recent innovations of covering technology include a com-
bination of glass and ETFE film to enhance thermal insulation while retaining
high transmission.


Growing systems

In most commercial large-scale greenhouse complexes worldwide, greenhouse
tomatoes are grown in ‘soilless’ cultures with drip irrigation. A large propor-
tion of tomato cultivation uses growing media (also known as substrates or
­aggregates). The term ‘hydroponic’ can refer to substrate-based soilless culture
 or to water cultures such as nutrient film technique (NFT). NFT is used far less
 than substrate-based soilless culture for commercial tomato production.
      For small-scale and for organic production, greenhouse tomatoes are pro-
 duced in the soil (see Chapter 11). Growing in soil requires measures to reduce
 soilborne diseases and pests. Possible measures are crop rotation, grafting,
 pre-planting soil sterilization by steaming or fumigation, or companion plant-
 ing and the use of biologicals that boost plant defence mechanisms.
      Among various substrates available in crop production, stone wool has
 been the most common substrate for soilless culture. However, due to the
 higher price and (in some countries) issues associated with the disposal of
 stone wool, more growers are using coconut coir as an alternative. Both sub-
 strates are commonly used as substrate slabs, typically 15 cm wide, 7.5 cm
 high and 90 or 120 cm long, wrapped in white thin plastic film. In a typical
 setting, slabs are placed in gutters (or gullies) to collect the efflux solution typ-
 ically called ‘drain’. The drain is either discharged or recycled, typically called
 ‘recirculated’. Recirculation involves pumping the drain back into the nutrient
 tank, ideally after sterilization. Then the nutrient solution must be adjusted to
 account for nutrients that were taken out by the plants. Many large-scale com-
 mercial growers use a raised, hanging gutter system so that harvestable fruits
 are at a convenient height for workers. Hanging gutter systems are also incorp-
 orated in the closed and semi-closed greenhouse system described elsewhere in
 this chapter.
      Other substrates used in soilless culture of tomatoes include perlite, peat
 and to some extent pumice. Properties of various substrates are summarized
 in Schwarz et al. (2014). Locally available materials such as sand and volcanic
 rocks (e.g. ‘tezontle’ in Mexico) are used also. These loose substrates can be
 placed in buckets, pots or bags as shown in Fig. 9.4. Regarding differences be-
 tween substrates in their effect on tomato plant growth and yield, a substrate
284                               C. Kubota et al.




Fig. 9.4. Tomato plants grown in pots containing perlite in a greenhouse.
(Photograph courtesy of Wim van Ieperen.)

trial at the University of Arizona (Jensen, 2002) showed that there were no
significant differences in yield of greenhouse tomatoes between five different
media (coconut coir, perlite, peat-lite, coir/perlite and stone wool) when irri-
gation was managed properly. A rule of thumb is to irrigate with a volume of
100 ml/plant (or 200 ml/plant with double shoots) per irrigation event, while
timing of the irrigation events is controlled so that the efflux solution volume is
about 30% of influx solution volume. Frequent irrigation with a small volume
each time rather than infrequent irrigation with a large volume is advanta-
geous in terms of maintaining the root zone conditions in an optimal range.
(See also Chapter 6.)
                          Greenhouse Tomato Production                       285


      Several types of substrate can be reused for a new planting, though
some substrates suffer loss of structure and quality over time. Substrates are
usually sterilized before a new crop is planted. Some growers reuse the sub-
strates without sterilization, which was supported by studies conducted in The
Netherlands (Sonneveld and Welles, 1984) as well as in the USA (Hochmuth
et al., 1991). However, it seems that single usage of substrate is more common
among large greenhouse growers, presumably to minimize the risk of diseases.


CROPPING SCHEDULES AND MANAGEMENT UNIQUE TO
GREENHOUSE
The tomato plant is a short-lived perennial and can be maintained for a period
of a year or more in favourable environments. Most production schemes are
based on an annual cycle, with allowance of about a month between crops for
clean-up and pest and disease control. This means that typically, tomato plants
are in the greenhouse for 11 months and in production for about 9 months
per year. Year-round production can be achieved with interplanting (or inter-
cropping, Fig. 9.5). The time chosen to be out of production is usually based
on unfavourable prices or environmental conditions. In hot and humid cli-
mates, many growers seed in late summer or autumn and carry the crop until
early summer of the next year. In this way they avoid summertime cooling,
poor fruit set and quality, pest build-up and competition from field tomatoes.
In many cases, large commercial greenhouses produce tomatoes almost or, in
some cases, all year-round, in order to increase return on investments and to
avoid buyers switching to alternative sources. In some cases interplanting is
performed, which is essentially planting young seedlings among the finishing
old plants, to ensure minimal interruption in supply.
     December planting, with production from March until November, is
common practice at northern latitudes in the northern hemisphere. In the
southern hemisphere the same is done but with a 6 months offset. Supplemental
lighting is used to support plant growth and enable tomato production in
periods with low natural light. Some growers, especially in the south-eastern
USA, and some in The Netherlands (approximately 100 ha), grow separate au-
tumn and spring crops, leaving short production breaks both mid-winter and
mid-summer.
     There is considerable interest in organic greenhouse tomato production.
With organic production, crop production must be certified by an authorized
organization that regulates the types of material that can be used. In Europe,
hydroponics and soilless cultural practices are not allowed under organic
schemes. In the USA, the National Organic Program does not preclude soilless
or hydroponic production, though synthetic substrates such as stone wool are
not allowed. All guidelines relative to organic fertilizers and pesticides must
be followed and the choice of cost-effective soluble organic fertilizers is still
286                                 C. Kubota et al.




Fig. 9.5. Willcox Arizona greenhouse showing new intercropped tomato plants
with older plants on either side. Note severe leaf pruning on older plants in order
to provide additional light to the new crop. The pipe-rail heating is visible in the
middle. (Photograph courtesy of Chieri Kubota.)

limited. Use of high-analysis chemical fertilizers and most chemical pesticides
is prohibited. Biological factors, such as soil condition and fertility and the use
of beneficial insects, are the main factors used to assure a vital, healthy crop
and good fruit quality. Total area of organic production in The Netherlands is
2% and that for tomato in the USA is 3% (USDA, 2013). (See Chapter 11 for
organic cultivation.)


Transplant production

 Transplant quality is defined by absence of pests and diseases, and the capacity
 to quickly grow and become established. Transplant production requires 3–6
 weeks (or as long as 8 weeks for grafted two-headed plants), depending on tem-
 perature and light conditions and stage of transplanting: either as plugs or as
 mature plants with visible first truss. A good transplant is one that is as wide as
 it is tall and is not yet flowering. Supplemental light (50–100 μmol/m2/s photo-
synthetic photon flux (PPF)) in situations with low natural light and carbon
­dioxide (CO2) enrichment (800–1000 μmol/mol) during ­transplant ­production
                           Greenhouse Tomato Production                       287


increase plant growth rates and plant quality, and have been a practice in spe-
cialized nurseries.
     Seedlings for stone wool systems are generally started in a sterile inert me-
dium, such as stone wool plugs at a density of around 600–1000 plants/m2.
Use of coated seeds is common, which is especially advantageous for machine
seeding and for uniform germination. Germination is often conducted in a
separate compartment with controlled temperature and humidity suitable for
germination. In some cases, especially for grafted seedlings, a sorting by size
may be conducted at the cotyledon stage to create a more uniform seedling
stand.
     Grafting, which involves combining a rootstock and a scion, was originally
done for attaining resistance to soilborne diseases and pests. For soil-based pro-
duction systems, rootstocks are selected mainly for resistance to diseases such
as Fusarium, Verticillium wilt and bacterial wilt, as well as root-knot nema-
todes (Meloidogyne sp.). Increasingly, greenhouse growers use grafted plants
even in soilless culture to achieve greater yields resulting from the stronger
root system (Kubota et al., 2008). Grafting is normally conducted when the
second true leaf emerges and is followed by 5–7 days of healing. Grafted plants
are sometimes pinched after healing to induce two lateral shoots per plant.
The strong rootstock can support two heads and thus reduces the number of
transplants needed for the production area without reducing the overall yields.
Grafted plant performance depends on the combination of rootstock and scion.
Rootstocks used for grafting tomato are either interspecific hybrids or intraspe-
cific hybrids. The advantage of the former is generally greater vigour but they
have the disadvantage of non-uniform germination. The standard method for
grafting tomatoes is tube grafting, where scion and rootstock seedlings are cut
at a sharp angle of 30–45 degrees and held together using an elastic plastic
or silicon tube (Fig. 9.6). Machine grafting for tomato is available but hand
grafting is still common in most nurseries.
     During the transplanting stage growing in large cubes, plant density
should be 20–22 plants/m2. A rule of thumb is that transplant leaves should
not touch. Sub-irrigation is always recommended, to minimize diseases on
wet foliage. Transplanting into the final production greenhouse is performed
just before the first flower opens (anthesis stage). This minimizes the time
between transplanting and first harvest in the greenhouse and also ensures
that the first flower grows out to a harvestable tomato fruit. Increasingly,
growers purchase seedlings grown in commercial nurseries and in some
cases the seedlings travel long distance over multiple days or are imported
from another country. Long-distance transportation of seedlings requires
appropriate temperature control during transportation, since unfavourable
conditions could cause flower abortion or abnormal development (Kubota
and Kroggel, 2006). Virus and viroid introduction associated with trans-
porting plants is a serious issue and some countries have already banned
importation of live tomato seedlings to minimize the risk of outbreak or
288                                C. Kubota et al.




Fig. 9.6. Grafting tomato seedlings. Tube grafting is a common method for tomato that
allows 100–400 grafts per hour per person. (Photograph courtesy of Chieri Kubota.)


introduction of new disease. In other cases, new certification programmes
(e.g. Good Seed and Plant Practices (GSPP)) have been introduced to prevent
the spread of diseases through vertically integrated hygiene practices. In
Japan, use of isolated growth rooms with artificial lighting (300 μmol/m2/s
PPF for 16–18 h photoperiod) and CO2 enrichment (about 1000 μmol/mol)
is becoming standard for high-quality tomato transplant production partly
because of increasing demand for transplants free from diseases and pests
(Kozai, 2015) (Fig. 9.7).
     Carefully designed watering schedules and nutrient programmes (espe-
cially with regard to nitrogen and potassium concentration) are necessary to
control plant growth, as plants tend to be overly vegetative after transplanting.
An example nutrient management programme is shown in Table 9.1.


Planting density/stem density

In a typical 3.2 m Venlo greenhouse span, there are four rows of tomato plants
and two pathways. Generally, tomatoes are set out in double rows, normally
around 0.5 m apart with 1.1 m access pathways between the double rows.
Plant populations are adjusted at the start of the crop by altering the in-row
spacing and later in the season by allowing extra heads (side shoots) to develop.
Atherton and Rudich (1986) gave detailed information of the relation between
plant density and yield per plant and consequences of spacing for mean fruit
                            Greenhouse Tomato Production                           289




Fig. 9.7. Indoor transplant production system using artificial lighting. More
commercial nurseries in Japan are introducing this type of high-tech propagation
facility to ensure hygiene and quality control. (Photograph courtesy of Chieri Kubota.)

weight and harvest costs. In general, under north European conditions a plant
density of 2.5 plants/m2 has been found to give the best financial margin.
In more southerly latitudes, a higher plant density may be used because of
higher light intensity. Similarly, the number of plant stems or side shoots al-
lowed to develop should be based on light intensity. This ensures not only a
high yield but also optimal quality, including taste. Uniformity of fruit size is
also improved when the number of side shoots is matched to incident light (Ho,
2004). For example, Canada has about 2 times higher radiation in winter and
40% higher radiation in spring compared with The Netherlands. Anecdotally,
optimal plant spacing in mid-December is 50 cm in Canada rather than 55 cm
in The Netherlands. Extra stems are left starting in week 5 in Canada versus
in week 9 in The Netherlands. For spring, recommended spacing in Canada is
40 cm in the row compared with 44 cm in The Netherlands. The use of strong
rootstock allows the making of double-headed grafted seedlings. This allows
growers to halve the number of plants while maintaining the shoot density
(shoots/m2). Increasingly, growers adopt the so-called ‘V-system’ with the two
shoots per plant trained in opposite directions along the gutter to form double
rows of plants.
290                                    C. Kubota et al.


Table 9.1. Final delivered nutrient solution concentration (ppm or mg/l) and
electrical conductivity (EC) recommendations for tomatoes grown in Florida in
stone wool, perlite or nutrient film technique (Hochmuth and Hochmuth, 1995).
Numbers in bold denote changes from previous stage.

                                               Stage of growth

              Transplant      First truss to    Second truss      Third truss     Fifth truss to
Nutrient     to first truss   second truss      to third truss   to fifth truss   termination

N                70              80                100             120              150
P                50              50                 50              50               50
K               120             120                150             150              200
Caa             150             150                150             150              150
Mg               40              40                 40              50               50
Sa               50              50                 50              60               60
Fe                2.8             2.8                2.8             2.8              2.8
Cu                0.2             0.2                0.2             0.2              0.2
Mn                0.8             0.8                0.8             0.8              0.8
Zn                0.3             0.3                0.3             0.3              0.3
B                 0.7             0.7                0.7             0.7              0.7
Mo                0.05            0.05               0.05            0.05             0.05
EC (dS/m)         0.7             0.9                1.3             1.5              1.8
a
 Calcium (Ca) and sulfur (S) concentrations may need to consider Ca and Mg concentrations
in well water and amount of sulfuric acid used for acidification.


Training system

In the 1970s and early 1980s, plants were trained up to the wire, then allowed
to drape down the other side (the up-and-down system). The negative effect on
yield of plant heads hanging down in the shade of the canopy was the reason
to move to the ‘plant lowering’ method, which later developed into the high-
wire system. The most widespread training system in The Netherlands and
North America at the present time is the high-wire system, which allows one
crop to be carried over several seasons. In this system, the growing tip remains
at the top of the canopy, but the stem is lowered and trails along the base of
the plants (Fig. 9.8). This system combines the yield-improving advantages of
maximum light interception by young leaves with increased labour efficiency
resulting from easier removal of leaves and fruit. However, it requires a high
enough greenhouse structure to accommodate the high horizontal wires used
in training the plants. The greenhouse needs to be extra high if any screening
materials are to be utilized for shading or energy conservation.
     The high-wire system requires early training of the main stem. As soon
after transplanting as possible, plant stems should be secured to plastic twine
hung from horizontal wires (Fig. 9.9). The end of the twine is attached to the
base of the stem with a non-slip loop. The twine is then wound around the
                           Greenhouse Tomato Production                         291




Fig. 9.8. Greenhouse worker standing on an electrical lift to sucker and train
plants. The lift moves down the row on tracks, which are also the hot-water pipes
(pipe-rail system). (Photograph courtesy of Arie de Gelder.)


stem in two or three spirals for each truss. The length of the supporting twine
should allow an extra 10–15 m to unwind. Usually this extra twine is held
in a winding hook placed near the wire. As an alternative to winding string
around the stem, the stem can be clipped to the string every 20–30 cm. Clips
can be sterilized and reused, but string should be discarded after each crop. If
the stems are to be ‘leaned and lowered’ (see below), it is useful to wind twine
around the lower stem, as the twine provides a better support than clipping.
     The objective of ‘leaning and lowering’ is to keep the head of the plant up-
right for light interception and still have the harvestable fruits at a convenient
292                               C. Kubota et al.




Fig. 9.9. Stone wool cubes containing two seedlings each are placed on stone
wool slabs in a Dutch greenhouse. Vine twine is wound around the stem. The tube
on the right in this high-wire system is a grow pipe with hot water for promoting
fruit development. Plastic tubing for CO2 enrichment is placed along with the grow
pipe between the rows of plants. (Photograph courtesy of Arie de Gelder.)


height for workers even when crops are in the greenhouse for long periods.
When plant tops near (or approach) the overhead wire, the strings are un-
wound from the twine hook hangers and string and plant are both moved side-
ways down the horizontal wire. This ‘lowering’ process is a delicate operation
in order to avoid breaking the stems. At the same time the hooks are moved
over, say, about 30 cm so that the plants start to ‘lean’ (all in the same dir-
ection, of course). The fourth flower truss is a good developmental stage for
this operation, as the stem is relatively vigorous and should resist breakage.
Leaning and lowering should be performed every 7–10 days. In some green-
houses, especially those using upright bags and hanging gutters, the stems
rest on special holders designed to give additional support. At the end of the
double row, the stems are wound around a corner and back down the next
row. Upright rods or wire supports are placed or posts are used at the corners
to turn the stems and this is another spot where stems frequently break. Black
plastic drain tube or other types of ‘bumpers’ are sometimes placed on the rods
to protect the stem as it is turned. Stems breaks can sometimes be successfully
mended with duct tape.
                            Greenhouse Tomato Production                           293


     Interplanting (Fig. 9.5) is a variation of the high-wire system that min-
imizes down time between crops and allows high annual yield and year-round
production. Each pair of adjacent rows of old plants is aligned to one side of
the trough, in order to create space on the other side of the trough for the new
crop. Young plants are then transplanted into the open space, next to the row
of old plants that are in their final stage. In the remaining old plants, the shoot
tips are pinched to terminate the shoot growth and leaves are removed progres-
sively during the transition time, except for the top four leaves. The height of the
leafy part of the old canopy is adjusted to increase light penetration to the new
plants. Disadvantages of intercropping are that greenhouse clean-up is more
difficult. Also, diseases may be carried over from old plants to new transplants.


Pollination management

Before the early 1990s, each flower cluster had to be vibrated with an electric
pollinator at least 3 times per week to release pollen and thus promote pollin-
ation. Poor pollination results in flower abortion and/or small, puffy or mis-
shapen fruits. It is particularly important to get good fruit set on the first three
trusses to establish an early pattern of generative growth. Pollination should
take place around midday when humidity conditions are most favourable
(50–70%). If humidity is too high in winter, temperatures can be raised by 2°C
at midday to reduce humidity. Too-high mean daily temperatures will reduce
pollen development and release (Sato et al., 2000), and too-low temperatures
at night (below 16°C) have the same effect (Portree, 1996).
     Nowadays bumblebees are used for pollination. They are shipped as hives
containing varying numbers of bees, depending on price. Generally, one worker
bee can service 40–75 m2 of greenhouse area (Portree, 1996) and therefore
about 5–7.5 hives/ha are required. As well as saving labour, the use of bumble-
bees increases yield and quality compared with manual vibration (Portree,
1996). Hives are placed on stands 1.5 m above the ground along the centre
aisle (Fig. 9.10) and protected from ants with sticky bands or water troughs.
Hives should be shaded by foliage or covers, and marked distinctively above
the hive and around the entrance so that bees can return to the correct hive
(Portree, 1996). Bumblebees are docile, unless the hive is disturbed or an indi-
vidual is squeezed, but it is still a good idea to maintain first-aid supplies on site.
No broad-spectrum insecticides or those with residual action should be used
once a hive is in place. All pesticides should be checked for effects on bumble-
bees, and, if compatible, application should be done at night with the hive closed
and covered. Some pesticides may be used when the hives remain closed during
3 days after treatment. The health of the hive can be monitored by observing
activity and looking for brown bruise marks on the anther cone as evidence of
flower visitation. At least 75% of withered flowers should have evidence of bee
visits. Most hives will need to be replaced within 2 months or less.
294                               C. Kubota et al.




Fig. 9.10. Bee hives are placed on stands in a greenhouse. A slide on the top front
of the box can be used to open or close access to the hive. (Photograph courtesy of
Koppert Biological Control.)


Other crop managements

Side shoots will develop from every axil. These side shoots should be removed
weekly, leaving only one main stem as a growing point. An exception is that
one side shoot may be maintained when light intensity is high compared
with fruit load. Often this is done on only one in four plants, and some weeks
later again on one in four plants as a method to increase stem density grad-
ually. In The Netherlands, management of side shoots is an important tool for
­optimizing fruit load of the crop and hence yield (De Koning, 1994). Leutscher
 et al. (1996) presented an economic evaluation of the optimal number of add-
 itional side shoots, based on a modelling approach.
       In the UK (Ho, 2004), uniform fruit size is maintained by fruit pruning and
 thereby controlling the number of fruits left on the truss, as well as by letting
 an additional side shoot develop as light increases. To address this problem as-
 sociated with the seasonal change in fruit size, Cockshull and Ho (1995) dem-
 onstrated that letting additional side shoots develop could help to minimize the
 undesirable extra-large fruit produced in summer. With the high-wire system,
 side shooting and other operations may be done standing on an electrical lift
 (Fig. 9.8).
       When plants are trained, lower leaves are removed (de-leafing or leaf
 pruning). Typically, all leaves are removed below the bottom fruit truss. The
 number of leaves to remain on the stem is determined by the grower and is
                           Greenhouse Tomato Production                        295


often between 12 and 18 fully expanded compound leaves. The optimal
number of leaves can be approached theoretically based on light interception
and microclimate inside the canopy (Sarlikioti et al., 2011). When a new crop
is interplanted next to the old one, de-leafing may be more severe to improve
the light conditions for the young seedlings (Fig. 9.5).
     An important factor to be considered in de-leafing is the effect on diseases,
pests and beneficials. Removing lower leaves from the greenhouse and then
destroying them will also remove immature whiteflies that are developing on
the lower leaves. However, if beneficials have been introduced, they will have
parasitized the immatures. Destroying these leaves will also prevent the benefi-
cials from emerging. Sometimes, if parasitized pupae are known to be present,
leaves are removed but left piled in the greenhouse for a few days to allow emer-
gence. In this case, de-leafing and leaf removal represent a trade-off between
emergence of whiteflies, emergence of beneficials and spread of disease from
the discarded leaves.
     The purpose of fruit pruning is to increase fruit size and fruit quality, and
to create the right balance between fruit load and leaf area. Fruit pruning can
also be used to maintain uniform fruit size. Misshapen fruits and undersized
fruits at the end of a cluster are always removed, as these will generally not
grow to marketable size and are thought to reduce the size of other fruits on the
truss. In some cases, all trusses are pruned to leave only the four fruits nearest
to the plant (proximal fruits). Whether or not trusses are pruned depends on a
number of factors such as the expected fruit size for that cultivar, how many
fruits normally form on the truss, growing conditions and the size demanded
by the market. A typical practice for cluster or TOV cultivars is to have four to
six fruits per truss. With some cultivars such as ‘Campari’, producing fruit in
size between cherry type and typical TOV type, up to eight to ten fruits can be
allowed to develop on each truss.
     When some greenhouse tomato cultivars are grown under relatively low
light conditions, the peduncles of the inflorescences (the truss stems) are too
weak to support the weight of the fruits they bear and are prone to bending
(Horridge and Cockshull, 1998) or ‘kinking’. Another reason sometimes given
for kinking is too high a temperature during the vegetative phase, which causes
the truss to become almost vertical (‘stick trusses’). As fruits develop on these
trusses, they may become kinked (Fig. 9.11). Truss hooks prevent the peduncle
from bending sharply under the weight of the fruit and prevent heavy trusses
from pulling off the stem. Another type of truss support is ‘truss braces’, which
are applied to the truss before fruit development, when the stem is still flexible.
     Five to eight weeks before the anticipated crop termination date, the
growing point is removed. A week later, all remaining flowers are removed.
An individual fruit requires 6–9 weeks from anthesis to harvest, so flowers
or small fruits present after topping will not have enough time to develop to
­maturity. Some growers leave some shoots at the top (or do not top at all) to
 provide shade to top fruits and also increase the transpiration to reduce the
296                               C. Kubota et al.




Fig. 9.11. Kinking of the peduncle of cluster tomato (TOV). (Photograph courtesy
of Arie de Gelder.)


risks of fruits cracking and russeting. (For further discussion of factors contrib-
uting to cracking and russeting, see Chapter 5.)


Nutrient and irrigation management

In systems with drip irrigation, nutrients are usually injected into the irrigation
water (fertigation) from concentrated solutions in stock tanks (Sonneveld and
Voogt, 2009). The fertilizers must be separated into at least two tanks to avoid
precipitation of calcium phosphate and calcium sulfate. Often a third tank is
                          Greenhouse Tomato Production                       297


present with acids for pH correction, and some large commercial greenhouses
are fitted with six or more separate tanks to give better control of the nutrient
solution. Some greenhouses have duplicate sets of stock tanks, so that irriga-
tion will not be interrupted while solutions are remade. Greenhouses where
interplanting is applied need to be equipped with two irrigation lines for each
row to cater for the distinct difference in nutrient requirement between young
seedlings and old plants.
     In an open (non-recirculating) system, approximately 30% excess irriga-
tion is applied. The main problem with open systems is that in areas of intensive
production there may be significant discharge of nutrients into the environ-
ment. There has been increasing interest over the past decade in nutrient-­
recirculation systems with provision for disinfection of the water and/or
replenishment of nutrients before reuse. Recirculation can decrease fertilizer
costs by 30–40% and water usage by 50–60% (Portree, 1996). Provisions for
reuse or at least recapture of greenhouse runoff should be designed into new
greenhouses, as already required in many countries, as recapture systems are
not easy to retrofit. In modern systems, the solution is monitored for salts and
water, and specific nutrients may be replenished.
     The main problem with recirculation systems is the risk of pathogens
spreading through the system. To prevent this, the return water (or drain) is
disinfected before it is pumped back into the nutrient tank. Ikeda et al. (2001)
listed the following types of water disinfection: (i) physical methods including
heat treatment, UV radiation and filtration; (ii) chemical methods including
ozone, chlorination, iodination, hydrogen peroxide and metal ions; and (iii)
biological methods including rhizosphere bacteria and antagonistic fungi,
mycoparasistic fungi and biosurfactants. The most widely used water disinfec-
tion method is a combination of filtration and UV radiation. When coconut
coir is used as substrate, UV radiation and heat treatment may be the preferred
method, because coir particles tend to reduce the UV light transmission.
     Large amounts of high-quality water are needed for plant transpiration,
which serves both to cool the leaves and to trigger transport of nutrients from
roots to leaves and fruits. Water consumption of 0.9 m3/m2/year is estimated
for greenhouses in The Netherlands (Anonymous, 1995) and 0.8 m3/m2/year
for British Columbia, Canada (Portree, 1996). Before building a greenhouse, it is
important to ensure adequate water availability and quality. It is also important
to consider whether evaporative cooling will be used (pad-and-fan cooling, fog-
ging, misting, roof sprinklers, etc.) and to estimate the amount of water needed
for that in addition to irrigation. In some regions, evaporative cooling water use
largely exceeds the irrigation water use in the greenhouse. In a study reported
by Sabeh et al. (2011), tomato production in a semi-arid greenhouse (located
in Arizona) consumed 0.40–0.78 m3/m2 over a 7-month period (early March
to early October) while additional water consumption for pad-and-fan cooling
was 1.45 m3/m2 during this period. Water used for irrigation in soilless culture
should have an electrical conductivity of below 0.5 dS/m, pH from 5.4 to 6.3
298                               C. Kubota et al.


and alkalinity below 2 meq/l. Water treatment to lower alkalinity and adjust
pH is usually possible. Lowering electrical conductivity (EC) by reverse osmosis
is often not economically feasible.
      The optimal frequency of irrigation varies with substrate rooting volume
and water-holding capacity. In stone wool slabs, rooting volume is very re-
stricted and slabs may be watered up to 6 times per hour in peak radiation,
and up to 30 times per day under summer conditions. Daily timing of irriga-
tion cycles also varies with water demand. In stone wool systems, fertigation
should begin a few hours after sunrise and end 1–2 h before sunset to decrease
diseases as well as summertime russetting and fruit cracking. Night watering
may be needed, however, during the winter when night-time heating decreases
relative humidity and in summer if conditions are hot and dry (OMAFRA,
2001). In The Netherlands an irrigation model has been developed for recir-
culating systems, based on leaf area, air temperature and season (De Graaf,
1988). Some growers use accurate weighing units (lysimeters), so that mois-
ture content of the slab as well as plant transpiration can be monitored every
hour to avoid stress to plants. The water content of the slab can also be directly
measured by sensors (Balendonck et al., 2005).


Steering plant growth (reproductive versus vegetative)

The balance between vegetative and reproductive (or generative) growth in the
tomato crop needs to be controlled. A well balanced plant (OMAFRA, 2001)
has a stem approximately 1 cm thick at about 15 cm below the shoot tip, dark
green leaves and closely spaced, large flower clusters that set well. Thicker stems
indicate excessive vegetative growth and are usually associated with poor fruit
set and low productivity. Thinner stems usually indicate carbohydrate starva-
tion, slow growth and ultimately low overall productivity. There are a number
of ways to control this balance, including the environmental controls sum-
marized in Table 9.2. EC, water supply and the ratio of nitrogen to potassium
in the feed also influence plant balance. EC influences plant growth through
its effect on plant/water relations (Heuvelink et al., 2003). High salinity in the
root environment, infrequent irrigation and low volume of irrigation water re-
duce water availability to plant roots, therefore decreasing water uptake and
overall growth rate, steering the plant towards generative growth. High tem-
perature and low relative humidity also have a generative effect because they
make water less available, resulting in ‘hard’ plants and slow growth. Lowering
nitrogen or maintaining a high potassium-to-nitrogen ratio in the fertilizer
feed is another technique to reduce the rate of growth and steer plants towards
generative development (OMAFRA, 2001).
      Temperatures can also be used to steer the plant towards a particular
growth pattern (Table 9.2). In the long cropping cycles typical of greenhouse
production, tomatoes tend to cycle between being overly vegetative at the
                            Greenhouse Tomato Production                        299


Table 9.2. Regulating plant growth by adjusting environment and nutrition.
Adapted from Reading the Plant (Portree, 1996).

Plant part    Observation          Recommendation

Plant head    Thick head         Too vegetative. Increase day temperature 1–2°C,
                                   especially during peak light period; increase
                                   the spread between day/night temperature
                                   settings by 1–8°C. The bigger the difference,
                                   the stronger the ‘generative’ signal to the plant
             Thin head           Too generative. Bring day/night temperatures
                                   closer together. Reduce the 24 h average in
                                   low radiation situation, e.g. early spring, late
                                   autumn. Target a 10–12 mm diameter head
                                   measured approximately 15 cm from growing
                                   tip or at the first fully expanded leaf before
                                   the flowering truss
             Head is ‘tight’ –   Vegetative imbalance. Increase the 24 h average
               leaves do not       by increasing the temperature between
               unfold until late   midnight and sunrise. Curl should be out
               in the day          between 11am and 4pm. Target a slightly
                                   higher temperature in afternoon (+1 to 2°C)
             Heads are purple Vegetative imbalance. Slight purpling is
                                   acceptable. Increase night temperature
             Grey heads          High tissue temperatures in combination with
                                   high CO2 levels. Can be in early spring when
                                   venting is limited. Reduce CO2 levels and shut
                                   off earlier in the day
             Chlorosis in head Chlorosis in the head can occur if the media
                                   water/air ratio is not in balance. If the slab
                                   is dry, increase the EC. If the slab is wet,
                                   increase only the micronutrients 10%.
                                   Maintain a temperature differential between
                                   head temperatures and root temperatures of
                                   more than 5˚C
Flower/truss Flower colour       Colour should be bright ‘egg-yolk’ yellow. If the
               pale yellow,        climate is humid, low vapour pressure deficit
               especially in       (< 2 g/m3) will often occur in the morning.
               morning             Recommend increase VPD, especially early
                                   in the morning ,from 3 to 7 g/m3 VPD, by
                                   opening vents for short period of time to
                                   let the moisture out, followed by heating.
                                   Flowering rate should be 0.8–1.0 truss/week
             Long, straight      Aggravated by low light and high temperature.
               flower trusses      Decrease 24 h temperature by decreasing day
               (kink trusses)      temperature. Promote an active climate 3 g/m3
                                   VPD. Avoid increasing plant density too early
                                   in the season when light levels are low
                                   (< 6 MJ/m2/day)
300                                  C. Kubota et al.


Table 9.2.   Continued.

Plant part     Observation           Recommendation

Flowers        ‘Sticky’ flowers in   Caused by too humid a climate, especially in
                  which the sepal      morning. Activate the plant in the morning
                  does not roll        with a minimum pipe and crack the vent. If
                  back                 left unchecked these flowers result in poor-
                                       quality fruit. Higher day temperature = higher
                                       VPD = less sticky
               Flowers too close     Plant is too generative. Go down with day, up
                 to the head,          with night, i.e. bring day/night temperatures
                 < 10 cm below         closer together. Late April/early May this is
                 growing tip           desirable in order to get enough fruit on the
                                       plant for summer fruit loads
Leaves         Short leaves          This condition occurs in late spring. The plant
                 in the head,          is in a vegetative imbalance. Fruit load is low
                 e.g. < 35 cm in       (< 85 fruit/m2). Increase differential between
                 length                day and night


­beginning of cropping (too much growth and too little fruiting) and later being
 overly generative (too little growth and excessive fruit loads). Where uniform
 production is desired, it is helpful to be able to moderate these swings in plant
 balance. Temperature is considered to be the most important factor affecting
 plant development and therefore an important tool to control flowering and
 fruit ripening. Quantitative data on the effects of temperature on flowering,
 fruit set, fruit growth and yield were used to develop yield prediction models for
 The Netherlands (De Koning, 1994).


GREENHOUSE ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL AND SYSTEMS

Because of their increasing sophistication, ease of use and affordability, com-
puters are used to optimize temperature, relative humidity, CO2 concentration
and light intensity. They are also very useful in providing a history of the crop
environment over time and alerting operators to malfunctions. Computers can
control many mechanical devices within a greenhouse, such as vents, heaters,
fans, evaporative pads, fogging, roof sprinklers, CO2 enrichment systems, ir-
rigation valves, fertilizer injectors, shade-cloths and energy-saving curtains.
Control is based on pre-set criteria, such as irradiance, outside temperature and
other weather conditions as well as required inside conditions (temperature,
humidity and CO2 levels). More importantly, computers can integrate the read-
ings of different sensors and process all the data and then steer the devices to
achieve a desired result, such as a particular temperature or humidity regime.
Computerized greenhouses would assist growers in selecting conditions that
                           Greenhouse Tomato Production                         301


would help to balance plant growth using environmental controls. (Computer
control of irrigation and fertilization regimes based on environmental condi-
tions is discussed in Chapter 6.)


Heating and cooling

Optimal day and night temperatures for different crop developmental stages
are shown in Table 9.3. Within the so-called linear range, there is a linear rela-
tionship between temperature and growth and development. Therefore, within
the linear range, 24 h mean temperature has a significant influence on plant
development rate. Therefore, theoretically, if daytime temperatures are warm,
night-time temperatures can be allowed to fall to the level that does not cause
any adverse physiological effect, to conserve energy.
     A particular strategy was developed in The Netherlands, called ‘tempera-
ture integration’, which aims at maintaining a particular average daily tem-
perature level rather than maintaining specific day and night temperatures (De
Koning, 1990). The background is that this strategy can be much more ­energy
efficient, because it allows maintaining a high temperature when heating is
cheap, for instance when a screen is closed or when the sun is out. Energy
savings of 10–15% have been realized by using temperature integration com-
pared with using regimes of high day and low night temperatures regardless of
the 24 h mean. Work summarized in Papadopoulos et al. (1997) suggested that
plants tolerate some variation around the optimal temperature over periods
ranging from 24 h to several days. For example, the temperature in a tomato
crop can safely deviate 3°C below standard for 6 days, provided that the fol-
lowing 6 days are 3°C above standard, as long as the average temperature over
the 12-day period stays the same. Even a deviation as high as 6°C can be toler-
ated if the 7-day temperature average is unaffected (Portree, 1996).
     Energy conservation measures are widely used in northern latitude green-
houses to reduce heating costs. Pulling thermal curtains of porous polyester
or an aluminum foil fabric over the plants at night reduces the radiative heat

Table 9.3. Growing recommendations for tomato cropping (adapted from
OMAFRA, 2001).

                       Germination Plant raising Transplanting Fruit production

Temperature (°C)
   Day                     25          19–21            24            20–22
   Night                   25           19–21           24             17–19
EC (dS/m)                0.0–0.1       2.5–3.0        2.5–3.0         2.7–4.0
pH                         5.8           5.8            5.8             5.8
Volume of                   –          0.2–0.3        0.2–0.3         0.5–2.5
  feed (l/day)
302                               C. Kubota et al.


transfer and decreases the overall heat loss by as much as 70% while closed,
or 20% over an entire year (Dieleman and Kempkes, 2006). Dual-purpose
lightweight retractable curtains are sometimes used for energy conservation at
night and for shade in daytime. Combining screens with forced ventilation and
temperature integration is a next practice in energy conservation (De Gelder
et al., 2012b; De Gelder and Dieleman, 2012).
      Typical greenhouse heating for small-scale operations is based on over-
head air heating systems. Large greenhouse operations usually use a natural
gas-fired central boiler with water and sometimes with steam for heat transfer.
The heating pipes are often located a short distance (e.g. 10 cm) above the
ground, between crop rows. They serve as a radiative heating system as well as
a track for trolleys for internal transport and for working in the crop. The pipes
are known as pipe-rail heating system (Figs 9.5 and 9.8). Additional heating
pipes are sometimes used inside the canopy (Fig. 9.9). These pipes are called
‘grow pipes’ and are attached with flexible hoses at both ends so that they can
be moved vertically to deliver heat to a selected zone of canopy to control plant
growth and/or fruit ripening.
      Extremely high temperatures are considered to limit greenhouse tomato
production in summer in lower latitudes. This is especially true where evap-
orative cooling is less effective because of high humidity (high wet-bulb tem-
perature). There are three common methods of greenhouse cooling: natural
ventilation; mechanical cooling; and evaporative cooling. In The Netherlands,
a new system called ‘closed greenhouse’ has been developed (De Gelder et al.,
2012a), which utilizes heat storage, heat pumps, heat exchangers and cooling
plates to control greenhouse temperatures, as described later in this chapter.
      Natural ventilation is popular in areas with relatively few days with high
ambient temperatures. For natural ventilation, some part of the greenhouse,
usually at the peak or ridge, is opened and air movement is created by wind
pressures or by gradients in air temperatures. Single-span greenhouses are
often ventilated via sidewalls that can be opened. Air exchanges driven by tem-
perature gradients in greenhouses are generally enhanced with increasing dif-
ference in height between roof vent and side vent (so-called chimney effect).
Multi-span greenhouses are vented through the roof vents.
      Any influence of side vents on the natural ventilation rate would be small,
especially for multi-span greenhouses. With any type of natural ventilation
system, however, insect netting in the ventilation opening to prevent pest entry
and escape of pollinators or beneficials reduces ventilation capacity by approxi-
mately 20%. Computer simulations based on computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) effectively demonstrate how structural design, wind direction relative to
vent opening, and/or insect netting affect the air exchange and temperature
distribution inside the greenhouse (e.g. Boulard, 2011).
      In arid and semi-arid climates, fan-and-pad evaporative cooling can
be used effectively. While natural ventilation is used in some warm-climate
greenhouses, hot conditions outside and lack of wind reduce its effectiveness.
                           Greenhouse Tomato Production                       303


In south-eastern USA, pest pressures, high humidity and high temperatures
force most growers to invest in active mechanical cooling, usually with a com-
bination of fans and pads. With mechanical cooling, low-pressure propeller-
blade fans are placed opposite the air intake, which is covered by cellulose
evaporative cooling pads. Louvres are placed outside the cooling pads and are
closed when the greenhouse is not venting. Ventilation fans are normally sized
to allow one air exchange per minute, though researchers in North Carolina
and Israel have documented increased cooling at higher rates, especially when
combined with evaporative cooling (Willits, 2000), while in arid climates in-
creasing ventilation may not necessarily increase the cooling efficiency as the
intake air is often higher in temperature and drier. Cooling system design needs
better engineering approaches and there has been much effort in this area,
along with the effort to make greenhouse tomato production year-round in
mild climates and in arid/semi-arid regions, where traditionally greenhouses
were not used in summer due to the unfavourable thermal conditions for plant
growth. High-pressure fogging systems have been introduced as greenhouse
cooling systems to a limited extent. The control logics and fogging nozzle dis-
tribution need to be further optimized to reduce large temperature fluctuations
as well as wetting the plants, especially when the fogging system is combined
with natural ventilation.
     Presumably, the temperature-averaging method described above as a way
to reduce heating costs can also be applied to warm conditions where cooling
costs are a concern. This question has not been addressed directly, but Peet
et al. (1997) reported that over the range 25–29°C, the actual day and night
temperatures and the day/night differential were less important than the daily
average in accounting for declines in fruit set, yield, fruit number and seedi-
ness, all of which are typical results of thermal stress. This suggests that in
areas where summertime night temperatures are low, day temperatures can
be allowed to exceed the normal maximal levels. In areas where temperatures
are excessive, lowering night-time temperatures by a heat-pump (air condi-
tioning) may be useful. Although the applicability of temperature averaging
to above-optimal conditions for plants setting fruit has not been tested directly,
data collected in south-eastern USA in an experiment with night-time air con-
ditioning (Willits and Peet, 1989) suggested the potential feasibility of such an
approach. With the closed glasshouse system in The Netherlands, temperat-
ures can be kept below 26°C (De Gelder et al., 2005).


Shade screen and supplemental lighting

Daily averaged light transmission of greenhouse is generally 70–80%, de-
pending on the covering and the greenhouse structure and orientation.
Therefore in almost all regions, CO2 and irradiance (light intensity) are the
most limiting factors for maximizing yield. Supplemental lighting is a common
304                               C. Kubota et al.


approach to promote growth in areas with short days in winter. One problem
is that the bulb assembly, reflector, transformer and starter, when placed over-
head, reduce the interception of natural light by the crop. Artificial lighting
has been used successfully in The Netherlands (Marcelis et al., 2002; Heuvelink
et al., 2006) and use of supplemental lighting for tomato crop is increasing
nowadays (see also Chapter 4). New technologies such as light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) have been tested as intra-canopy lighting to deliver photosynthetically
efficient light to lower leaves of a canopy (Dueck et al., 2012; Hao et al., 2012;
Gómez and Mitchell, 2016). However, the economics of supplemental LED
lighting has not been proved yet and more on-farm evaluations are necessary.
An empirical approach suggested that profitability of supplemental lighting
for tomato crop was dependent on the lamp photon efficiency, electricity price,
lamp photon utilization efficiency and heating fuel cost offset by the heat gen-
erated by the lamps (Kubota et al., 2016). Therefore, efficient photon delivery
methods such as intra-canopy lighting are expected to reduce the lighting cost
and to increase profitability.
     Shade-cloths and screens are used in southern production areas to protect
fruit at the top of the canopy from sunscald, russetting and cracking caused by
high temperatures and to reduce greenhouse temperatures. See Chapter 5 for
additional discussion of the causes of these disorders. However, reduction of
PAR decreases plant growth and yield.


CO2 enrichment

Carbon dioxide can be added to the greenhouse in several ways. Natural gas or
propane burners hooked up to sensors can be used to generate CO2. Different
fuel sources provide different amounts of CO2. Burning 1 m3 of natural gas,
1 l of kerosene or 1 l of propane provides 1.8 kg, 2.4 kg and 5.2 kg of CO2, re-
spectively (Portree, 1996). Flue gases from a hot-water boiler burning natural
gas can be captured and recirculated. All these sources of CO2 will add heat and
water vapour to the greenhouse, as well as potential pollutants. Water vapour
can be condensed before injecting to the greenhouse. Low NOx (nitrous oxide
and nitrogen dioxide) burners are available to minimize risks of pollutants re-
ducing yield. Ethylene is a typical pollutant causing physiological disorders for
tomato plants even at a very low concentration (less than 0.1 μmol/mol) when
exhaust gas of an inefficient combustion heater is introduced into the green-
house for the purpose of CO2 enrichment. The most expensive but safest option
is compressed or liquid CO2. Some areas of The Netherlands have distribution
nets for liquid CO2 (Organic CO2 for Assimilation by Plants, OCAP) coming from
waste CO2 from industrial sources. Sensors for CO2 concentration should be
calibrated periodically and located near the top of the plant. CO2 distribution
within the greenhouse should also be as uniform as possible to avoid yield dif-
ferences and for efficient utilization.
                          Greenhouse Tomato Production                       305


     CO2 enrichment to 750–800 μmol/mol increases yields compared
with standard outside conditions (about 390 μmol/mol) (see also Chapter 4).
A standard approach to enrichment (Nederhoff, 1994) is to inject CO2, as a
by-product of combustion of natural gas, at a level of 800 μmol/mol during
heating. At low ventilation rates (< 10% opening), this level is reduced to 500
μmol/mol when CO2 cost is significant. With further vent opening, the goal
is to maintain a base level of 450 μmol/mol, but this is not always possible.
Currently, in The Netherlands during May to September, CO2 is maintained at
ambient levels. In Japan, a CO2 controller was developed and made commer-
cially available to maintain CO2 concentration precisely at the same as outside
level (i.e. null balance CO2 enrichment) (Kozai et al., 2015).
     Computer control models (Aikman et al., 1996; Stanghellini et al., 2012)
have been developed to convert the increase in photosynthesis by CO2 enrich-
ment into an anticipated financial return from fruit sales by linking biological
processes with a fruit price model. Since fruit prices are very difficult to pre-
dict, use of such models is limited. Bailey (2002) considered strategies for CO2
enrichment both with liquid CO2 and with CO2 from greenhouse heaters or
combined heat and power (CHP) units. The heat produced by burning gas in
a boiler or CHP can be stored in a heat storage tank to be used during night-
time, while CO2 is used during daytime. The exhaust gas of a CHP needs to be
‘cleaned’ before it can be used in the greenhouse. On the basis of the financial
margin between crop value and the combined costs of CO2 and natural gas,
Bailey (2002) showed that the most economic CO2 control point with liquid
CO2 depended on its price. With exhaust gas CO2 and CHP units, financial mar-
gins depended on whether there was heat storage.
     In southern latitudes, greenhouses are vented at a higher rate and so CO2
enrichment is not practical. In Raleigh, North Carolina, tomatoes could only be
CO2 enriched for 2–3 h daily for most of the growing season (Willits and Peet,
1989). In any case, when temperatures are above 25°C, in North American
conditions CO2 enrichment may not be cost effective (Portree, 1996) and may
increase stomatal resistance, which reduces transpiration and increases leaf
temperature. In the ‘closed’ greenhouse and ‘semi-closed’ greenhouse, high
levels of CO2 (> 1000 μmol/mol) will be used year-round.


Management of relative humidity or vapour pressure deficit

Relative humidity in a greenhouse is a result of the balance between transpir-
ation of the crop, soil evapotranspiration, condensation on the greenhouse
cover and vapour loss during ventilation, as well as air temperature inside the
greenhouse. Therefore relative humidity inside the greenhouse exhibits di-
urnal and seasonal changes. Energy conservation features, such as the use of
double layers of polyethylene films, have increased relative humidity (Hand,
1988).
306                               C. Kubota et al.


      Although computer control programs can be very sophisticated, there are
limitations on the effectiveness of humidity control. For example, as vents are
opened and closed to control temperature, relative humidity and CO2 levels
also change. If relative humidity levels become too high, while temperatures
remain in an acceptable range, some combination of heating and ventilation
may be necessary to maintain acceptable relative humidity and temperature.
When the outside air temperature is lower than the set point, the heater should
be turned on to maintain air temperature and the vents opened or the fans
operated. With the ‘closed’ greenhouse, humidity control may be achieved
without influencing other climatic factors, because cooling is provided by heat
exchange with aquifer rather than ventilation.
      Use of vapour pressure deficit (VPD) of the air, i.e. the difference between
the saturated vapour pressure at that temperature and the current vapour
pressure, is more encouraged to understand the plant response (i.e. transpir-
ation and leaf temperature), as it shows the capacity of the air to hold vapour
and directly influences evapotranspiration rates. In The Netherlands, growers
use VPD expressed as weight of vapour (g) per volume (m3) of moist air (also
called ‘humidity deficit’) but the rest of the world uses pascal (Pa or kPa), an SI
unit for partial pressure. Conversion from the Dutch unit to kPa needs temper-
ature-specific coefficients, as mass and volume relationship of vapour differs at
different temperatures. The University of Arizona developed a web-based appli-
cation (https://cals.arizona.edu/vpdcalc/) to compute VPD and humidity def-
icit from air temperature and relative humidity. In a study in The Netherlands
(Bakker, 1990), high relative humidity (low VPD) reduced leaf area because
of calcium deficiency, and also increased stomatal conductance, reduced final
yield and reduced mean fruit weight. This study was conducted over a fairly
limited range of VPDs, however: 0.35–1.0 kPa in daytime and 0.21–0.71 kPa
at night. It is unclear to what extent low humidity (high VPD) is deleterious
to the plant if adequate water is available, but in general VPDs > 1.0 kPa are
considered potentially stressful. In northern Europe, VPDs > 1 kPa are rarely
seen, but in semi-arid parts of North America, VPDs will exceed this range
without properly humidifying the air inside the greenhouse. A greenhouse
temperature of 26°C and relative humidity of 60% would result in a VPD of
1.35 kPa or 9.7 g/m3, for example. If plants transpire more water than can be
supplied through the roots, fruit may develop blossom-end rot (BER) and sto-
mata may close, resulting in poor growth.
      The most important reason for reducing humidity and keeping leaf sur-
faces dry is disease prevention. Diseases spread rapidly when VPD is 0.2 kPa or
less for prolonged periods of time and germination of fungal pathogen spores
increases on wet leaf surfaces. This is most likely when warm, sunny days in-
crease leaf transpiration and evaporation but moisture is held as water vapour
until leaf or glazing internal surfaces cool to the dewpoint at night. Water
vapour then condenses on to these cool surfaces and drips may fall on to the
leaves. Wetting agents, either sprayed on the inside film or incorporated into
                           Greenhouse Tomato Production                        307


the plastic, prevent condensation from dripping because moisture remains as
a film, which slides off in a sheeting action, rather than dripping off on to the
leaves. The problem of condensate dripping on leaves is most severe in Quonset-
style double-poly greenhouses, because the rounded arch makes it hard to col-
lect and remove condensation. Condensation over leaves may be reduced by
increasing air movement to 1 m/s in the greenhouse. This is because increase
in air movement would decrease boundary layer resistance over leaves to heat
transfer. Enhanced heat transfer would reduce the differences in temperature
between the leaf surface and the air and therefore prevent leaf surfaces from
cooling below the dewpoint. Air movement can be increased by either running
the fans on hot air furnaces or by horizontal airflow (HAF) fans. These small
fans are placed above the canopy along the sides of the house to push air in one
direction on one side of the greenhouse and in the opposite direction on the
other side, and operate continuously, except when the exhaust fans are turned
on for ventilation. HAF fans create a slow horizontal air movement, which also
makes temperatures more uniform. In The Netherlands a condensation model
has been developed (Rijsdijk, 1999) that enables growers to modify the heating
regime during sunrise (the typical period when condensation is formed) as a
function of measured fruit temperature rather than by use of ventilation fans.
Condensation can form on the fruit because at sunrise air heats up (much faster
than fruits) and plant transpiration increases the dewpoint of the air inside the
greenhouse, while the fruit surface remains cold. Fruits heat more slowly than
leaves and so if no condensation forms on the fruits, it should also not occur
on the leaves. Therefore fruit temperature should be carefully monitored in the
greenhouse during the time when condensation may occur.


Computerized climate control and monitoring system

The level of computerized climate control must be in accordance with the tech-
nical equipment. A high-tech greenhouse with sensors can be controlled by
high-end climate computers to achieve optimal climate conditions. High-level
computation such as neural network has been investigated and demonstrated
for possible integration into greenhouse control systems (e.g. Fitz-Rodriguez
et al., 2012). For high tunnels and greenhouses with lower technology, less
expensive temperature control equipment is adequate to regulate temperat-
ures. In high-end instrumentation, sensors can give information on plant tem-
perature, photosynthesis and transpiration, which can be incorporated into
control algorithms. The sensor information can be integrated into ‘speaking
plant’ control (Steppe, 2012), in which plant information is reflected in the
decisions toward optimization of climate conditions (Van Straten et al., 2011).
Regardless of the level of technology, calibrating sensors periodically is critical
to maintain the high accuracy of instrumentation. For example, air tempera-
ture and humidity sensors must be placed inside well aspirated housing with
308                              C. Kubota et al.


radiation shield. Measurement and reporting guidelines have been developed
for disseminating more appropriate methods suitable in greenhouse climate
measurements (Both et al., 2015).


New environmental control technology

The ‘closed’ greenhouse is a recent innovation in The Netherlands to save en-
ergy as well as increase yields. The basic components of ‘closed’ greenhouses are
mechanical cooling, heat-pump technology to produce warm water for heating
and cold water for cooling, and seasonal storage of energy (cold and heat) in
aquifers (De Gelder et al., 2012a). Hanging gutter systems are used along with
plastic tube air distribution systems (Fig. 9.12). This concept has the poten-
tial to fully control climate for optimal growth, because temperature, humidity
and CO2 levels can be controlled independently, but at present the system is not
economically beneficial. In south-western USA, France and The Netherlands,
‘semi-closed’ greenhouse designs with limited ventilation have been successfully
used commercially, because the limited ventilation allows CO2 enrichment and
also because more light transmission is expected from reduced numbers of roof
vents that are often covered with insect screens and/or add more structural




Fig. 9.12. A semi-closed greenhouse with hanging gutter system and inflated
air-distributing plastic tubes. (Photograph courtesy of Chieri Kubota.)
                             Greenhouse Tomato Production                             309


shade. In ‘semi-closed’ or ‘closed’ greenhouses, typically a large vertical tempera-
ture gradient exists due to a cooling system in the lower part of the greenhouse.
However, this gradient (> 5°C during the day in summer) does not negatively
affect tomato plant growth, development and yield (Qian et al., 2015).


CONCLUSION: GREENHOUSE AS A SYSTEM TO CONTROL
PLANT PRODUCTIVITY INTERACTIVELY
Although worldwide protected cultivation of tomato is small compared with
open field production, it is an important industry sector in many countries.
The cultivation system in the greenhouse offers the possibility of training the
plants in an optimal way and optimizing climate conditions for maximal crop
growth and production. It is a challenge to the grower to integrate information
about plant development and climate into decisions about how to grow the
plants to achieve maximal production of perfect quality with minimal costs of
energy, labour and other production factors.


REFERENCES

Aikman, D.P., Fenlon, J.S. and Cockshull, K.E. (1996) Anticipated cash value of photo-
     synthate in the glasshouse tomato. Acta Horticulturae 417, 47–54.
Anonymous (1995) Kwantitatieve informatie voor de glastuinbouw 1995-1996. Informatie
     en Kennis Centrum Landbouw, Afdeling Glasgroente en Bloemisterij, Aalsmeer/
     Naaldwijk.
Atherton, J.G. and Rudich, J. (1986) The Tomato Crop. A Scientific Basis for Improvement.
     Chapman & Hall, London.
Bailey, B.J. (2002) Optimal control of carbon dioxide enrichment in tomato green-
     houses. Acta Horticulturae 578, 63–70.
Bakker, J.C. (1990) Effects of day and night humidity on yield and fruit quality of glass-
     house tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.). Journal of Horticultural Science 65,
     323–331.
Bakker, J.C., Bot, G.P.A., Challa, H. and van de Braak, N.J. (1995) Greenhouse Climate
     Control. An Integrated Approach. Wageningen Pers, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Balendonck, J., Bruins, M.A., Wattimena, M.R., Voogt, W. and Huys, A. (2005) WET-
     sensor pore water EC calibration for three horticultural soils. Acta Horticulturae
     691, 789–795.
Both, A.J., Benjamin, L., Franklin, J., Holroyd, G., Incoll, L.D., Lefsrud, M.G. and
     Pitkin, G. (2015) Guidelines for measuring and reporting environmental param-
     eters for experiments in greenhouses. Plant Methods 11, 43. doi: 10.1186/
     s13007-015-0083-5.
Boulard, T. (2011) Advantages and constraints of CFD greenhouse modeling. Acta
     Horticulturae 893, 145–153.
Brugger, M., Montero, J., Baezz, E. and Perez-Parra, J. (2005) Computational fluid
     ­dynamic modeling to improve the design of the Spanish parral style ­greenhouse.
310                                  C. Kubota et al.


     In: VanStraten, G., Bot, G.P.A., VanMeurs, W.T.M. and Marcelis, L.M.F. (eds)
     Proceedings of the International Conference on Sustainable Greenhouse Systems,
     pp. 425–431.
Castellano, S., Santamaria, P. and Serio, F. (2016) Solar radiation distribution inside
     a monospan greenhouse with the roof entirely covered by photovoltaic panels.
     Journal of Agricultural Engineering 47, 1–6.
Cockshull, K.E. and Ho, L.C. (1995) Regulation of tomato fruit size by plant density and
     truss thinning. Journal of Horticultural Science 70, 395–407.
Costa, J.M. and Heuvelink, E. (2000) Greenhouse Horticulture in Almeria (Spain): Report
     on a Study Tour, 24–29 January 2000. Horticultural Production Chains Group,
     Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
De Gelder, A. and Dieleman, J.A. (2012) Validating the concept of the next gener-
     ation greenhouse cultivation: an experiment with tomato. Acta Horticulturae 952,
     545–550.
De Gelder, A., Heuvelink, E. and Opdam, J.J.G. (2005) Tomato yield in a closed green-
     house and comparison with simulated yields in closed and conventional green-
     houses. Acta Horticulturae 691, 549–552.
De Gelder, A., Dieleman, J.A., Bot, G.P.A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2012a) An overview of
     climate and crop yield in closed greenhouses. Journal of Horticultural Science and
     Biotechnology 87, 193–202.
De Gelder, A., Poot, E.H., Dieleman, J.A. and De Zwart, H.F. (2012b) A concept for re-
     duced energy demand of greenhouses: the next generation greenhouse cultivation
     in the Netherlands, Acta Horticulturae 952, 539–544.
De Graaf, R. (1988) Automation of water supply of glasshouse crops by means of cal-
     culating the transpiration and measuring the amount of drainage water. Acta
     Horticulturae 229, 219–231.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1990) Long term temperature integration of tomato: growth and
     development under alternating temperature regimes. Scientia Horticulturae 45,
     117–127.
De Koning, A.N.M. (1994) Development and dry matter distribution in glasshouse
     tomato: a quantitative approach. PhD Dissertation, Agricultural University,
     Wageningen, The Netherlands, 240 pp.
Dieleman, J.A. and Kempkes, F.L.K. (2006) Energy screens in tomato: determining the
     optimal opening strategy. Acta Horticulturae 718, 599–606.
Dueck, T.A., Janse, J., Eveleens-Clark, B.A., Kempkes, F.L.K. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2012)
     Growth of tomatoes under hybrid LED and HPS lighting. Acta Horticulturae 952,
     335–342.
Fitz-Rodríguez, E., Kacira, M., Kubota, C., Linker, R. and Arbel, A. (2012) Neural net-
     work predictive control in a naturally ventilated and fog cooled greenhouse. Acta
     Horticulturae 952, 45–52.
Giacomelli, G.A. and Roberts, W.J. (1993) Greenhouse covering systems. HortTechnology
     3, 50–58.
Gómez, C. and Mitchell, C.A. (2016) In search of an optimized supplemental lighting
     spectrum for greenhouse tomato production with intracanopy lighting. Acta
     Horticulturae 1134, 57–62.
Gupta, R., Tiwari, G.N., Kumar, A. and Gupta, Y. (2012) Calculation of total solar frac-
     tion for different orientation of greenhouse using 3D-shadow analysis in Auto-
     CAD. Energy and Buildings 47, 27–34.
                              Greenhouse Tomato Production                               311


Hand, D.W. (1988) Effects of atmospheric humidity on greenhouse crops. Acta
     Horticulturae 229, 143–155.
Hao, X., Zheng, J.-M., Little, C. and Khosla, S. (2012) LED inter-lighting in year-round
     greenhouse mini-cucumber production. Acta Horticulturae 956, 335–340.
Hemming, S., Dueck, T., Janse, J. and van Noort, F. (2008) The effect of diffuse light on
     crops. Acta Horticulturae 801, 1293–1300.
Hemming, S., Kempkes, F.L.K. and Mohammadkhani, V. (2011) New glass coatings for
     high insulating greenhouses without light losses – energy saving, crop production
     and economic potentials. Acta Horticulturae 893, 217–226.
Hemming, S., Swinkels, G.L.A.M., van Breugel, A.J. and Mohammadkhani, V. (2016)
     Evaluation of diffusing properties of greenhouse covering materials. Acta Horticulturae
     1134, 309–316.
Heuvelink, E., Bakker, M.J. and Stanghellini, C. (2003) Salinity effects on fruit yield in
     vegetable crops: a simulation study. Acta Horticulturae 609, 133–140.
Heuvelink, E., Bakker, M.J., Hogendonk, L., Janse, J., Kaarsemaker, R. and Maaswinkel, R.
     (2006) Horticultural lighting in the Netherlands: new developments. Acta
     Horticulturae 711, 25–33.
Higashide, T. and Heuvelink, E. (2009) Physiological and morphological changes over
     the past 50 years in yield components in tomato. Journal of the American Society for
     Horticultural Science 134, 460–465.
Ho, L.C. (2004) The contribution of plant physiology in glasshouse tomato soilless cul-
     ture. Acta Horticulturae 648,19–25.
Hochmuth, G. and Hochmuth, B. (1995) Challenges for growing tomatoes in warm
     climates. Greenhouse Tomato Seminar, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. American
     Society for Horticultural Science, ASHS Press, Alexandria, Virginia, pp. 34–36.
Hochmuth, G.J., Hochmuth, R.C. and Carte, W.T. (1991) Preliminary Evaluation of
     Production Media Systems for Greenhouse Tomatoes in Florida. Research Report 91–17.
     Suwannee Valley Research and Education Center, Suwannee Valley, Live Oak, Florida.
Horridge, J.S. and Cockshull, K.E. (1998) Effect on fruit yield of bending (‘kinking’) the
     peduncles of tomato inflorescences. Scientia Horticulturae 72, 111–122.
Ikeda, H., Koohakan, P. and Jaenaksorn, T. (2001) Problems and countermeasures in the
     re-use of the nutrient solution in soilless production. Acta Horticulturae 578, 213–219.
Jensen, M. (2002) Controlled environment agriculture in deserts, tropics and temperate
     regions – a world review. Acta Horticulturae 578, 19–25.
Kempkes, F.L.K. and Hemming, S. (2012) Calculation of NIR effect on greenhouse cli-
     mated in various conditions. Acta Horticulturae 927, 543–550.
Kozai, T. (2015) Transplant production in closed systems – main components and their
     functions. In: Kozai, T., Niu, G. and Takagaki, M. (eds) Plant Factory. An Indoor
     Vertical Farming System for Efficient Quality Food Production. Academic Press,
     Cambridge, Massachusetts, pp. 237–242.
Kozai, T., Kubota, C., Takagaki, M. and Maruo, T. (2015) Greenhouse environment
     control technologies for improving the sustainability of food production. Acta
     Horticulturae 1107, 1–13.
Kubota, C. and Kroggel, M. (2006) Air temperature and illumination during transpor-
     tation affect quality of mature tomato seedlings. HortScience 41, 1640–1644.
Kubota, C., McClure, M.A., Kokalis-Burelle, N., Bausher, M.G. and Rosskopf, E.N. (2008)
     Vegetable grafting: history, use, and current technology status in North America.
     HortScience 43, 1664–1669.
312                                   C. Kubota et al.


Kubota, C., Kroggel, M., Both, A.J., Burr, J.F. and Whalen, M. (2016) Does supplemental
     lighting make sense for my crop? Empirical evaluations. Acta Horticulturae 1134,
     403–411.
Leutscher, K.J., Heuvelink, E., Van de Merwe, R.A. and Van den Bosch, P.C. (1996)
     Evaluation of tomato cultivation strategies: uncertainty analysis using simula-
     tion. In: Lokhorst, C., Udink ten Cate, A.J. and Dijkhuizen, A.A. (eds) Information
     and Communication Technology Applications in Agriculture: State of the Art and
     Future Perspectives. Proceedings of the 6th International Congresss for Computer
     Technology in Agriculture (ICCTA ’96). VIAS, Wageningen, The Netherlands, pp.
     492–497.
Li, T., Heuvelink, E., Dueck, T.A., Janse, J., Gort, G. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2014)
     Enhancement of crop photosynthesis by diffuse light: quantitfying the contribu-
     tion factors. Annals of Botany 114, 145–156.
Marcelis, L.F.M., Maas, F.M. and Heuvelink, E. (2002) The latest development in the
     lighting technologies in Dutch horticulture. Acta Horticulturae 580, 35–42.
Marcelis, L.F.M., Broekhuijsen, A.G.M., Meinen, E., Nijs, E.M.F.M. and Raaphorst, M.G.M.
     (2006) Quantification of the growth response to light quantity of greenhouse
     grown crops. Acta Horticulturae 711, 97–103.
Montero, J.I., Henten, E.J.v., Son, J.E. and Castilla, N. (2011) Greenhouse engineering:
     new technologies and approaches. Acta Horticulturae 893, 51–63.
Nederhoff, E.M. (1994) Effect of CO2 concentration on photosynthesis, transpiration
     and production of greenhouse fruit vegetable crops. Dissertation, Wageningen
     Agricultural University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
OMAFRA (2001) Growing Greenhouse Vegetables. Publication 371. Ontario Ministry of
     Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Toronto.
Papadopoulos, A.P. and Hao, X.M. (1997a) Effects of greenhouse covers on seedless cu-
     cumber growth, productivity, and energy use. Scientia Horticulturae 68, 113–123.
Papadopoulos, A.P. and Hao, X.M. (1997b) Effects of three greenhouse cover materials
     on tomato growth, productivity, and energy use. Scientia Horticulturae 70, 165–178.
Papadopoulos, A.P., Pararajasingham, S., Shipp, J.L., Jarvis, W.R. and Jewett, T.J. (1997)
     Integrated manaement of greenhouse vegetable crops. Horticultural Reviews 21,
     1–39.
Peet, M.M., Willits, D.H. and Gardner, R. (1997) Response of ovule development and
     post-pollen production processes in male-sterile tomatoes to chronic, sub-acute
     high temperature stress. Journal of Experimental Botany 48, 101–112.
Portree, J. (1996) Greenhouse Vegetable Production Guide. British Columbia Ministry of
     Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Abbotsford, British Columbia.
Qian, T., Dieleman, J.A., Elings, A., De Gelder, A. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2015) Response of
     tomato crop growth and development to a vertical temperature gradient in a semi-
     closed greenhouse. Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology 90, 578–584.
Rijsdijk, A. (1999) Risico van condensatie bepalen met de computer. Groenten en Fruit
     20, 12–13.
Sabeh, N.C., Giacomelli, G.A. and Kubota, C. (2011) Water use in a greenhouse in a
     semi-arid climate. Transactions of ASABE 54, 1069–1077.
Sarlikioti, V., de Visser, P.H.B., Buck-Sorlin, G.H. and Marcelis, L.F.M. (2011) How plant
     architecture affects light absorption and photosynthesis in tomato: towards an ide-
     otype for plant architecture using a functional-structural plant model. Annals of
     Botany 108, 1065–1073.
                              Greenhouse Tomato Production                              313


Sato, S., Peet, M.M. and Thomas, J.E. (2000) Physiological factors limit fruit set of to-
     mato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) under chronic high temperature stress. Plant,
     Cell and Environment 23, 719–726.
Schwarz, D., Thompson, A.J. and Kläring, H.-P. (2014) Guidelines to use tomato in ex-
     periments with a controlled environment. Frontiers in Plant Science 5, 625.
Sonneveld, C. and Voogt, W. (2009) Plant Nutrition of Greenhouse Crops. Springer,
     Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Sonneveld, C. and Welles, G.W.H. (1984) Growing vegetables in substrates in The
     Netherlands. Proceedings 6th ISOSC International Congress on Soilless Culture, pp.
     613–632. ISOSC, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Stanghellini, C., Bontsema, J., De Koning, A. and Baeza, E.J. (2012) An algorithm for
     optimal fertilization with pure carbon dioxide in greenhouses. Acta Horticulturae
     952, 119–124.
Steppe, K. (2012) Plant sensors and models: getting the dialogue started. Acta
     Horticulturae 957, 277–280.
Teitel, M., Baeza, E.J. and Montero, J.I. (2012) Greenhouse design: concepts and trends.
     Acta Horticulturae 952, 605–620.
USDA (2013) Organic production. Economic Research Service (ERS), US Department of
     Agriculture, Washington, DC. Available at: http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-prod-
     ucts/organic-production.aspx (accessed 21 January 2018).
Van Straten, G., Van Willigenburg, G., Van Henten, E. and Van Ooteghem. R. (2011)
     Optimal Control of Greenhouse Cultivation. CRC Press, New York.
Van Winden, C.M.M., Van Uffelen, J.A.M. and Welles, G.W.H. (1984) Comparison of the
     effect of single and double glass greenhouses on environmental factors and pro-
     duction of vegetables. Acta Horticulturae 148, 567–573.
Willits, D.H. (2000) The Effect of Ventilation Rate, Evaporative Cooling, Shading and Mixing
     Fans on Air and Leaf Temperatures in a Greenhouse Tomato Crop. ASAE Paper No.
     00-4058. ASAE Meeting Presentation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Willits, D.H. and Peet, M.M. (1989) Predicting yield responses to diffferent green-
     house CO2 enrichment schemes: cucumbers and tomatoes. Agricultural and Forest
     Meteorology 44, 275–293.
