                                  10
       Postharvest Biology and Handling
                  of Tomatoes

                                 Mikal E. Saltveit




INTRODUCTION

Originally, the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) had an indeterminate growth
habit; continuously producing flowers and fruit during the entire growing
season. Cultivars (i.e. cultivated varieties) with this indeterminate growth habit
are grown where multiple harvests are economically justified, e.g. in the green-
house, or in the field when plants are supported by a pole or trellis. These in-
determinate fresh market cultivars have fruit at various stages of maturity on
the plant, and hand harvesting is often necessary to maximize yield through
multiple harvests. While this labour-intensive practice is economically justified
for some fresh market field and glasshouse-grown fruit, processing tomatoes
must be culturally managed to produce maximum yields with once-over mech-
anical harvests.
     Breeding and cultural practices have modified the growth habit of pro-
cessing cultivars and most field-grown fresh market tomatoes into a deter-
minate growth habit in which the bush-like form produces side shoots that
terminate in inflorescences. Determinate cultivars lend themselves to once-over
mechanical harvesting and are therefore well suited for processing, since the
plants are destroyed during harvest and the mechanical injuries the fruit sus-
tain during harvest precludes their marketing as fresh fruit. Foliar sprays of
ethylene-releasing chemicals are used before harvest to hasten the maturity of
processing tomatoes and reduce the variability among the ripening fruit.
     Processing tomatoes are harvested when fully ripe and quickly transported
from the field to processing plants. The minimal postharvest care they receive
during the hours between harvest and processing is often limited to shading the
fruit from the sun or removing field heat by pre-cooling. In contrast, fresh market
tomatoes are often harvested when mature, but less than fully ripe, and their
ripening is carefully managed before, during and after transport to distant markets.
     The protected greenhouse environment allows manipulation of many en-
vironmental parameters to maximize yield and quality. Greenhouse tomatoes


314                       © CAB International 2018. Tomatoes 2nd edition (E. Heuvelink)
                    Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes             315


can be grown in soil, peat moss, sawdust, stone wool, or other soilless and/or
inert media, or by using a nutrient film technique or other hydroponic system.
Fruit growth and development can be controlled by regulating pollination, ad-
justing nutrient availability to the stage of development (minerals as well as
carbon dioxide), and modulating temperature and humidity.
     Incorporation of naturally occurring ripening mutations into commercial
lines has produced cultivars with significantly longer shelf-life but may have
reduced the levels of valued indicators of quality. Traditional breeding with the
incorporation of genes that convey chilling tolerance from related species has
proved difficult and only resulted in cultivars with slightly increased chilling
tolerance.


HARVESTING

Methods employed to harvest fresh market and processing tomatoes differ be-
cause their respective markets emphasize different measures of quality. Field-
grown fresh market tomatoes are harvested at the mature-green through ripe
stages of maturity, depending on the market demand and location. Mature-
green fruit are firm enough and have sufficient shelf-life to survive the stress
of being shipped considerable distances and still arrive at the market with
enough shelf-life to be marketed at the wholesale and retail level. More mature
fruit can be harvested for regional markets where transportation to the retail
market is faster and less damaging to the softer, riper fruit. Ethylene is used
to ripen mature-green fruit to red-ripe while in transit or at regional markets.
Consumers value fruit with deep red and uniform colour, a lack of external
blemishes and injuries, and characteristic aroma and flavour.
     Processing tomatoes are once-over mechanically harvested when fully
ripe and immediately transported to a processing plant. Pre-harvest applica-
tions of ethylene-releasing chemicals hasten and concentrate ripening and so
a larger percentage of the fruit are at the proper stage of ripeness. Uniform
deep red colour and characteristic aroma and flavour are also valued in pro-
cessing tomatoes but surface blemishes and injuries are unimportant since the
fruit are processed within a few hours of harvest and processing reduces the
fruit to a peeled product or homogeneous paste.
     Greenhouse tomatoes are usually harvested riper than fresh market field-
grown fruit and are therefore more prone to mechanical injuries, because
they are softer and have a shorter shelf-life than fruit harvested at the mature-
green stage. Greenhouse-grown fruit are picked twice or three times a week as
they reach the proper stage of development. More harvests are needed during
warmer weather when the fruit develop faster. Fruit picked before fully devel-
oped (i.e. before reaching the mature-green stage) are more prone to mechan-
ical injuries because of poorly developed epidermis and waxy cuticle than are
more developed fruit. The thin skins and locular walls of greenhouse ­cultivars
316                                  M.E. Saltveit


are valued by consumers, but these traits make them more susceptible to mech-
anical injury. Some greenhouse-grown fruit are harvested ‘on the vine’ at the
breaker stage and marketed in clusters of three to six fruit.
     Fruit that quickly reach the pink stage soon after harvest are called
‘vine-ripened’ tomatoes. Fewer mature-green and more vine-ripe fruit will
probably be marketed in the future because of the development of non-toxic,
gaseous inhibitors of ethylene action (e.g. 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP))
(Sisler et al., 1996) and the incorporation of mutant genes that delay ripening
through traditional plant breeding or genetic engineering to retain firmness
during the later stages of ripening. However, maturity at harvest will still
need to be uniform to minimize handling during grading and packing, and to
ensure the consistent response of the fruit to the application of postharvest
treatments.
     Processing tomatoes are machine harvested in most industrialized coun-
tries (Fig. 10.1). The once-over, destructive harvest starts when at least 90%
of the fruit are ripe. This determination is done by periodic visual inspections
of fruit in the field. Application of chemicals to stimulate ripening (e.g. ethyl-
ene-releasing compounds) can be done a few weeks prior to harvest to maxi-
mize the percentage of coloured fruit. Harvest begins with the entire plant
being lifted from the soil on to a mobile platform where the fruit are mech-
anically removed from the plant, which is discarded back into the field. The
separated fruit are passed across an inspection platform where people manu-
ally discard defective (e.g. unripe, misshapen, diseased, etc.) fruit. The selected




Fig. 10.1.   Fully ripe processing tomato fruit being mechanically harvested.
                     Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes               317


fruit are dumped into large gondolas or field bins being pulled alongside the
harvester.
      The mechanical injuries inflicted on the fruit as a result of machine har-
vesting are not severe enough, given the rapidity of processing, to significantly
reduce the quality of the processed product. In comparison, the often extended
duration of time between harvest and the consumption of fresh market toma-
toes would allow excessive water loss and pathogenic infections to occur as
a consequence of injuries to the surface of the fruit during mechanical har-
vesting, and thereby render the fruit unacceptable for the fresh market. Also,
small bruises and skin injuries that do not affect internal quality are visually
apparent and render the fruit unacceptable to many consumers. Processed
tomato products include peeled whole, quartered and diced fruit, and
­concentrates for ketchup, juice, pulp, paste and soup. The market for ­tomato
 concentrate is larger than that for fresh fruit.
      While appearance, texture and flavour are the important quality attri-
 butes of fresh market tomato, soluble solids, pH, titratible acidity, viscosity and
 colour are the major quality components of processing tomatoes. Other quality
 characteristics of processing tomatoes include uniform colour throughout the
 fruit (i.e. high lycopene and low chlorophyll content), freedom from decay, and
 firmness. Soluble solids include sugars, organic acids and other dry matter
 constituents such as pectic fragments that remain in solution. The produc-
 tion of tomato concentrates and paste requires removal of water, which is an
 energy-intensive process. Therefore it is less expensive to produce concentrates
 from fruit with high soluble solids and dry matter content. Viscosity or con-
 sistency is a complex physical property that is influenced by the amount and
 suspension of tomato solids, the size and linkage of pectins, and the solution
 of salts, proteins, sugars and organic acids in the processed product. Colour in
 tomato products is predominantly the result of the two lipid soluble pigments:
 lycopene and β-carotene.
      Over the years, a great deal of work has been done by traditional plant
 breeding and recently by genetic engineering to increase the soluble solids,
 viscosity and colour of processing tomato cultivars. Significantly im-
 proving soluble solids content is difficult, because the trait is polygenetic,
 the environment exerts a large effect on expression of the trait, and there
 is a negative relation between soluble solids and other desirable character-
 istics such as high yield and concentrated ripening. For these reasons, the
 product of yield times soluble solids content (often expressed as °Brix) is
 more useful in estimating the productivity of processing tomatoes. In gen-
 eral, yields have been significantly increased, but the soluble solids content
 of the fruit has at most increased only slightly (Stevens, 1994; Zamir et al.,
 1999). The main reason for this relatively slow progress in increasing solids
 is the lack of genetic variability for high soluble solids in processing tomato
 germplasm. Attempts to increase soluble solids by introducing high solids
 potential from wild species of Lycopersicon chmielewskii and L. cheesemanii
318                                M.E. Saltveit


have been unsuccessful. This is because most of the high solids potential
has disappeared by the time the appropriate genes have been introgressed
into an acceptable horticultural type (Stevens, 1994). Modern genetic en-
gineering may be able to introduce specific genes or clusters of genes that
will increase soluble solids, but it will require a better understanding of
the relationship among the partitioning of photosynthate within the plant,
the mechanisms of soluble solids accumulation within the fruit, and the
various other components of yield.
      For the fresh market, multiple hand harvests are often needed to produce
an economic yield when indeterminate cultivars are grown. Development of
determinate, bush-type plants almost eliminated the growth of field-grown
indeterminate tomatoes that were grown on plants supported by a pole or
trellis. Plant decline is rapid after harvest of the major set from determinate
plants, and few additional harvests are economical. However, the demand for
high quality and heirloom fruit in regional up-scale markets has made cultural
practices that favour multiple hand harvesting of riper fruit economically jus-
tifiable in some instances.
      Harvested greenhouse-grown fruit are commonly hand carried to packing
stations within the greenhouse and then moved on small carts to collection
centres. In some large greenhouse operations, transportation systems are in-
corporated into the structures to protect the fruit from damage and reduce
labour costs during harvest. Canals have been built under main greenhouse
floors to float the fruit from areas of production to the packing area. The
pickers empty their baskets into the troughs. The flowing water carries the
fruit to a roller elevator where the fruit passes over a dryer prior to grading
and packing. This can be an efficient system but cracking of the skin can be a
problem and shelf-life can be decreased if the fruit remain in the water for more
than 6 hours.
      A number of rail systems have been developed that are economical and
efficient for use within a greenhouse. The rail system can be temporarily
­installed during harvest or permanently installed so it can be utilized during
 the rest of the production cycle. A cart or trolley can run on heating pipes or
 specially made rails positioned among the rows. In the over-the-crop system,
 the heating pipes or rails are suspended between the rows and the suspended
 trolley runs along them. In both rail systems, the baskets of harvested fruit
 are transferred to a motorized cart that is hauled to the packing area. In the
 suspended system, the rails often continue to the packing area. Overhead
 wire cables can also be installed in a continuous loop to bring picking carts
 or baskets from the picking areas to the packing area. Some systems use
 self-propelled ‘robotic’ carts that follow sensing strips embedded in the green-
 house floor and can be programmed to go from one specific location within
 the greenhouse to another without manual intervention. When properly de-
 signed, such systems reduce labour and fruit damage and shorten the time
 from harvest to packing.
                    Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes              319


     Most field-grown fresh market tomatoes are hand harvested at the
mature-green stage of maturity. Fruit grown on indeterminate plants, sup-
ported by a pole or trellis in the field or greenhouse, are usually harvested at
more ­advanced stages of maturity. Mechanical harvesters are being developed
to assist in harvesting fresh market fruit, but none are yet commonly used in
a commercial setting. Pickers put the fruit into buckets, bins or on to conveyer
belts that move the fruit into large field bins or gondola trailers (Fig. 10.2).
Fruit should be shielded from the sun during transport to the packing fa-
cility to prevent excessive heating of exposed fruit. Without the plant canopy
to shade the fruit, direct sunlight can heat the surface of the fruit to a high
enough temperature to damage the exposed tissue and adversely affect sub-
sequent ripening.
     In most commercial cultivars, ripe fruit abscise at the stem scar, but
mature-green fruit may retain part of the pedicle in jointed fruit. Joints or
knuckles form when a zone of abscission develops in the pedicle. Care should
be taken with fruit harvested in clusters, or with a portion of the stem or ped-
icle attached, so that the protruding tissue does not puncture adjacent fruit
during harvesting, handling, packing and transport. However, retention of the
pedicle is seen as a positive quality aspect in some markets (Fig. 10.3). For ex-
ample, in cluster tomatoes, the entire cluster is cut off at the main stem and
kept together either by placing them in a single layer in boxes or by putting
them into mesh bags.




Fig. 10.2. Fresh market mature-green tomato fruit being hand harvested into
buckets and field bins.
320                                    M.E. Saltveit




Fig. 10.3.   Breaker fruit in small plastic field trays with pedicle attached.


PACKAGING

Upon reaching the packing shed, the fruit can be flushed out of the trailer
with chlorinated water. Smaller field bins or boxes can be unloaded by hand or
gently dumped into water or on to a padded table. Although it would seem ad-
vantageous to start to remove field heat as soon as possible by using cold water
in the dump tank, in reality the water should be a few degrees warmer than the
fruit. Cold water will cool gases within the fruit and facilitate water intrusion
through the stem scar. However, this cause of water intrusion is minor in com-
parison with that caused by hydrostatic pressure resulting from immersing
the fruit too deeply in water. Water entering the fruit carries with it chemical
and biological contaminants that accumulate in the dump water and for this
reason water intrusion into harvested fruit should be avoided.
     An inclined mesh conveyer belt is often used to remove the fruit from the
dump tank and at the same time eliminate trash and undersized fruit. A spray
of clean chlorinated water on the fruit as they are removed from the dump
tank on the inclined conveyer belt facilitates removal of dirt and other field
debris. The fruit are then dried with jets of air or sponge rollers. A visual in-
spection is often used to eliminate cull, over-mature, misshapen and otherwise
                     Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes                321


­unmarketable fruit. If regulations allow, the fruit may then be sprayed with an
 edible food-grade wax that may contain a fungicide. However, consumers in
 many markets object to the application of fungicide and waxes for purely cos-
 metic purposes.
      After sorting for defects and colour differences, the fruit are segregated
 into several size categories by weight or diameter. Moving belts with increasing
 diameter holes (Fig. 10.4) or diverging rollers can sort by size, while spring-
 loaded pans can sort by weight. Other belts running underneath and perpen-
 dicular to the sorting belts convey the sized fruit to an area for one additional
 quality inspection where any remaining unmarketable fruit are eliminated
 (Fig. 10.5).
      These sorting and grading steps can be injurious to softer fruit and they are
 therefore done primarily by hand when more mature fruit are being packed. In
 small packing sheds, breaker and turning fruit can be unloaded from small field
 bins onto sorting lines where the fruit are segregated into ripeness classes and
 hand packed (Fig. 10.6). The minimal handling that the fruit receive in this
 type of packing house permits riper fruit to be picked, packed and marketed.
      The design of the many inspection lines in a packing shed requires serious
 attention by people trained in ergonomics. Inspection to remove unmarketable
 fruit from a mass of fruit rapidly moving past someone on a conveyer belt can
 quickly induce visual fatigue and degrade the inspector’s effectiveness. The
 position of the inspector in relation to the conveyer belt, the speed of the belt,
 its width, the source, quality and direction of lighting, the arm movements
 necessary to remove the unwanted fruit and the placement of the receptacle




Fig. 10.4. A series of wide belts with holes of increasing diameter are used to sort
fruit by size.
322                                M.E. Saltveit




                                                    Fig. 10.5. Part of a packing
                                                    line for mature-green tomato
                                                    fruit where fruit are inspected
                                                    for external quality defects.


for the eliminated fruit are all important factors that must be considered in
the design of the inspection line. A simple movement to identify and remove a
single fruit may be extremely easily and rapidly accomplished the first time but
delayed and neglected the thousandth time. The incorporation of various ana-
lytical instruments can assist and/or eliminate human inspectors.
     Mature-green fruit that appear the same externally can be at different stages
of maturity as shown by differences in respiration, ethylene production, firm-
ness of locular tissue and incipient lycopene synthesis in the columella tissue.
Instruments that measure colour (e.g. the appearance of the red-coloured
lycopene pigment) have been developed for the commercial sorting of fruit ma-
turity by the development of external colour. However, these instruments are
not effective at determining the ripening stage of mature-green fruit, because
they cannot detect the lycopene that first accumulates in the inner columella
tissue of mature-green fruit as they start to ripen. The highly variable content
of chlorophyll in mature-green fruit makes it an inaccurate measure of their
maturity. Internal development of lycopene, evolution of ethylene and lique-
faction of the locular contents have all been shown to be reliable indicators of
                     Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes              323




Fig. 10.6. Small packing house where breaker and turning fruit are inspected for
external quality defects and packed with minimal handling.


fruit maturity. Non-destructive methods to ascertain internal defects and the
level of fruit maturity include acoustic, near-infra-red (NIR), NMR, MRI and
many other technologies that use either penetrating radiation or resonance
properties of the fruit to disclose the fruit’s internal properties (Abbott et al.,
1997; Milczarek et al., 2009). However, instruments employing these methods
in a commercial packing shed have not yet been extensively adopted.
     Mature-green and breaker fruit can be packed loose by weight or volume,
while riper fruit should be placed on trays in cardboard boxes. Since mature-
green fruit are usually treated with ethylene and ripened while in these boxes,
the boxes must be resistant to moisture produced by the fruit during ripening.
The boxes must also have a sufficient number of properly spaced holes to pro-
vide adequate ventilation. When placed on a pallet, the boxes must either be
arranged with air channels between them, or aligned so that the holes in ad-
jacent boxes line up to permit easy air movement through all the boxes on the
pallet. Improper placing of the boxes can occlude holes in adjacent boxes and
effectively isolate interior boxes from the movement of air providing ethylene
and carrying away the products of respiration (i.e. heat, carbon dioxide, water
vapour).
     The enhanced production of heat, moisture and carbon dioxide by
ripening fruit must be carried away from the fruit by fresh air containing the
low concentration of ethylene used to stimulate the natural ripening of the
fruit. Airflow and exchange should keep carbon dioxide levels in the boxes
324                                                                           M.E. Saltveit


below 0.2%, because high levels of carbon dioxide can inhibit the ripening
­action of ethylene (Saltveit, 1997). Forced air is used for cooling after packing
 and for maintaining the proper temperature and atmosphere during the appli-
 cation of ethylene.
      The superior appearance and flavour of greenhouse tomatoes can be used
 to justify a higher selling price that is needed to offset the higher production
 costs. This may be difficult in the USA, where supermarket mark-up is higher
 than in European countries and where greenhouse fruit must compete with
 low-cost field-grown tomatoes for much of the year, and with imported fruit
 during the off-season.


RIPENING

Tomatoes are climacteric fruit that are characterized by the onset of a climac-
teric rise in respiration and ethylene production coincident with ripening; i.e.,
softening and the first appearance of red colour (Fig. 10.7). Treatment with
propylene, a biological analogue of ethylene, can also stimulate ripening.
     The manifold changes accompanying ripening are presented in de-
tail in Chapter 5. This section will concentrate on the postharvest initiation
of ripening with ethylene and how this step fits into the general postharvest
handling of tomato fruit.


                                                               Ethylene                                         Ripeness
                                                                                   Ripeness
                                        1.0                                                                                 6




Ethylene (μl/l) or carbon dioxide (%)
                                                   Fruit treated                                           Carbon dioxide
                                                  with propylene
                                        0.8                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                Ripeness score
                                                                          Carbon dioxide
                                                                                                            Ethylene
                                        0.6                                                                                 4



                                        0.4                                                                                 3
                                                                                                Fruit kept in air
                                              Treatment with
                                        0.2     propylene                                                                   2
                                                 (150 ml/l)

                                        0.0                                                                                 1
                                              0        2           4      6        8       10       12        14       16
                                                                              Days at 20°C

Fig. 10.7. Climacteric rise in respiration and ethylene production with the onset of
ripening with or without treatment with 150 μl/l propylene in air for 4 days at 20°C.
                      Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes                 325


      Tomato fruit ripening requires the coordination of thousands of genes in-
volved in softening, pigment destruction and/or synthesis, and accumulation of
characteristic levels of sugars, acids and volatiles. In climacteric fruit like tomato,
many of these changes are coordinated by ethylene. As the tomato fruit reaches
physiological maturity, the response of fruit tissue to ethylene switches from a
negative (System 1) to a positive (System 2) feedback. In immature tomato fruit
tissue, ethylene inhibits its synthesis (System 1) thereby maintaining a low en-
dogenous concentration that does not stimulate ripening. In physiologically ma-
ture tissue, ethylene promotes its own synthesis and this increasing endogenous
level induces ripening-associated genes (Klee and Giovannoni, 2011).
      Identification and characterization of ripening mutants has helped to ex-
plain how ethylene is critically involved in tomato fruit ripening. The ripening
control mutants ripening-inhibitor (rin), nonripening (nor) and Colorless nonrip-
ening (Cnr) produce modified transcription factors that affect both ethylene
and non-ethylene activities, while the Never-ripe (Nr) mutant affects the NR
ethylene receptor (Klee and Giovannoni, 2011). Tomatoes incorporating the
rin or nor gene are said to have the extended shelf-life (ESL) trait and ripen more
slowly than conventional fruit. However, the quality of ESL fruit is severely af-
fected if they are harvested at the MG2 stage of maturity (Cantwell, 2010).
The minimum harvest maturity for ESL fruit should be at the Pink (USDA Color
Stage 4) stage to maximize quality of the ripened fruit.
      Tomato fruit ripening can be controlled by genetically altering (whether by
incorporating naturally occurring mutant genes by traditional plant breeding,
or by genetically engineering with sense or antisense technology) ethylene
production, perception and/or action. However, these techniques can inad-
vertently compromise fruit quality traits. New techniques, such as RNAi silen-
cing that can target specific genes, and has been used to reduce ACC synthesis
activity in tomato, could be employed to alter ripening behaviour without un-
intentionally altering fruit quality (Gupta et al., 2013). Pigment synthesis and
accumulation can be adversely affected in some slower ripening cultivars (Klee
and Tieman, 2013). Surprisingly, increasing the level of anthocyanin pigments
(natural antioxidants) in harvested tomatoes not only reduced disease suscep-
tibility but also doubled the fruit’s shelf-life (Zhang et al., 2013). Obviously,
ripening is a complicated, multifaceted process with interrelated components
that are still not fully integrated into an overarching system so that one aspect
of fruit ripening can be manipulated without inadvertently ­altering other as-
pects of fruit quality.
      The period of growth and development from fertilization to maturity lasts
about 45–55 days, depending on cultivar and climate. Ripening is the final
stage of maturation when fruit develop the characteristic colour, flavour, tex-
ture and aroma associated with optimum quality. Whether initiated naturally
or induced by ethylene, ripening is accompanied by many changes, including
an increased production of heat from respiration. Proper stacking of boxes
on the pallet is important to ensure adequate air flow to remove this heat of
326                                 M.E. Saltveit


­respiration and the accompanying water vapour driven from the fruit because
 of their elevated temperature (Fig. 10.8).
      Ventilation and refrigeration capacity of the storage facility must be
 matched with the increased production of heat during the climacteric rise
 in respiration. The rate of respiration can increase from 20% to 50% during
 ripening from a mature-green to red stage of development. The increased rate
 of evaporation of water from ripening fruit due to the elevated respiratory pro-
 duction of heat must be minimized by decreasing the vapour pressure deficit
 between the fruit and its surrounding atmosphere. This is done by maintaining
 high relative humidities (e.g. 85–95% RH) in the ripening rooms.




Fig. 10.8. Properly stacked boxes of mature-green tomato fruit on a pallet being
moved by a fork-lift to a controlled temperature room for ethylene treatment.
                     Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes                327


     Exposure to certain ppm (μl/l) levels of ethylene in air (e.g. 100 ppm) or
to dips in ethylene-releasing compounds such as Ethrel promotes the ripening
of mature-green tomato fruit to acceptable levels of quality (Table 10.1).
Ethylene promotes the destruction of chlorophyll and the synthesis of lycopene
in ripening fruit (see Chapter 5, this volume). However, ethylene can also in-
duce ripening (i.e. lycopene synthesis and softening) in fruit that are so imma-
ture that good quality is never attained. In one fresh market cultivar, fruit that
were about 90% of final size (i.e. more than 42 days after anthesis) were able to
go through a normal climacteric and ripened to an acceptable level of quality
after harvest (Saltveit, unpublished data). Fruit less mature did turn red and
soften if given enough time, but the ripened fruit were of inferior quality. Fruit
that were older than 31 days coloured without added ethylene, while younger
fruit required added ethylene to colour and soften. Exposure of immature fruit
as young as 17 days after anthesis to 1000 ppm ethylene in air induced a re-
spiratory and ethylene climacteric, colour change and softening, but the fruit
were of inferior quality.
     Once ripening is initiated at the transition from the mature-green to the
breaker stage, internal levels of ethylene rise and continue to support the
auto-catalytic production of ethylene and further ripening. In vegetative and
immature fruit tissue, ethylene suppresses its synthesis so that a low level
of ethylene is maintained in the tissue. Once ripening is initiated in climac-
teric fruit like tomato, this negative feedback of ethylene on ethylene syn-
thesis changes to a positive feedback, and the increasing levels of endogenous
ethylene promote even more synthesis and accumulation of internal ethylene.
The relatively impermeable cuticle of the mature tomato fruit minimizes
ethylene loss to that which occurs through the stem scar and effectively iso-
lates the internal tissue from depletion of ethylene resulting from diffusion to
the external atmosphere.
     Removal of ethylene from the external atmosphere does not signifi-
cantly lower internal levels that are sustained by cellular synthesis, or alter
the pattern of ripening. Introducing gaseous inhibitors of ethylene action (e.g.
carbon dioxide, 1-MCP) into the environment of the fruit can slow ripening,
as can lowering the temperature to near the chilling threshold. A few hours of

Table 10.1. Effect of ethylene treatment, either as 10 ppm (μl/l) ethylene in air or
2000 ppm (μg/g) ethephon dip, on the rate of ripening of mature-green tomato fruit.

                     Days to     Days from breaker       Days from red-
Days of treatment    breaker        to red-ripe          ripe to discard   Total days

0                      10.9              6.9                  15.9           33.7
1                       7.8              6.3                  17.1           31.2
2                       8.1              7.2                  16.4           31.7
4                       5.9              5.8                  22.2           33.9
Continuous              4.4              6.3                  15.2           25.9
328                                                    M.E. Saltveit


­exposure to ethanol vapour can inhibit ripening of tomato fruit harvested at
 various degrees of ripeness without affecting subsequent quality (Saltveit and
 Sharaf, 1992).
      An ethylene concentration of 100–150 ppm is commonly used to ini-
 tiate and hasten the ripening of harvested mature-green fruit at 18–22°C
 (Fig. 10.9). Advanced mature-green fruit treated in this way will reach the
 breaker stage in 24–36 h, depending on temperature. This atmosphere can be
 produced by a number of methods. The ‘shot’ method introduces a relatively
 large volume of ethylene into the ripening room by metering ethylene from
 compressed gas cylinders. Care should be taken when using this method, since
 ethylene in air mixtures between 3.1% and 32% (31,000–320,000 ppm) are
 explosive. While these explosive concentrations are more than 200-fold higher
 than the recommended levels for ripening, in rare instances they have been
 reached when metering equipment has malfunctioned. Using compressed
 gas mixtures containing around 3.1% ethylene in nitrogen (i.e. banana gas)
 to inject ethylene into a ripening room eliminates this problem. The concen-
 tration of ethylene in the ripening room is diluted as the gas is injected and
 the ethylene concentration can never reach the explosive limit. Catalytic con-
 verters are devices that employ heat and a metal catalyst to convert propri-
 etary ethanol mixtures into ethylene. They deliver a continuous flow of a low
 concentration of ethylene gas into the storage room, thereby eliminating any
 possibility of reaching an explosive mixture of ethylene in air. This method also
 eliminates the storage and exchange of high pressure gas cylinders in favour of
 plastic bottles containing mixtures of denatured ethanol.
      Sprays of aqueous solutions or applications of viscous paste containing
 ethylene-releasing compound are used to hasten the ripening of fruit still


                  14

                  12

                  10




Days to breaker
                  8

                  6

                  4
                                                                       Fig. 10.9. Relation between
                  2                                                    externally applied ethylene
                                                                       concentration and the days it
                                                                       takes mature-green tomato fruit
                  0
                       0.001   0.01     1.0    10       100    1000    to reach the breaker stage of
                               Ethylene concentration (μl/l)           ripeness.
                     Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes                329


­attached to the plants. Ethephon (2-chloroethylphosphonic acid, CAS Number:
 82375-49-3; also known as Ethrel, Bromeflor, Arvest, CEPA) decomposes to
 innocuous products and ethylene in plant tissue. While stable at acidic pH,
 ethephon quickly breaks down to ethylene as the temperature and pH values
 increase (Table 10.2). Between 10°C and 20°C the Q10 is 6, while between 30°C
and 40°C the Q10 is 5. Decomposition follows first-order kinetics; in any given
 unit of time the same fraction will decompose. The half-times for decompos-
 ition at different temperatures and pH values are given in Table 10.2. A spray
 or dip in a 2000 ppm aqueous Ethrel solution produced the same effect as gas-
 sing the fruit with 10 ppm (μl/l) ethylene in air (Saltveit, unpublished data).
 Although ethephon has very low toxicity and can be used on processing to-
 matoes and fresh market tomatoes before harvest, many governments strictly
 limit its residual levels in ripened fruit to such an extent that it is not approved
 for commercial use in the USA as a postharvest treatment.
      Because multiple picks are usual for fresh market tomatoes, pre-harvest
 ethephon application is not practical since the ethylene produced can accelerate
 flower abscission, leaf drop and general senescence of the whole plant. Localized
 application of pastes containing ethylene-releasing compounds to a single truss
 (e.g. on greenhouse-grown indeterminate varieties) eliminates this problem.
      Almost all fruit harvested at the mature-green stage are gassed with
 ethylene either at the packing warehouse or upon receipt at the terminal whole-
 sale market. Fruit can be exposed to ethylene either before or after packing, but
 most are treated after packing. Treating before packing has some advantages.
 Fruit that develop decay while ripening in the warm, humid ripening room at-
 mosphere can be eliminated before packing. After ripening, uniformly ripe fruit
 can be selected from those that are less ripe to produce a more uniform pack.
 Although ripening is accelerated and made more uniform by gassing with
 ethylene, the inherent variability in maturity of mature-green fruit can result
 in uneven ripening within a lot of fruit. Packed mature-green fruit may there-
 fore produce a ‘checkerboard’ of fruit with different maturities after ripening.
 This may require removal of fruit from the boxes and their re-sorting and
 ­repacking to produce boxes containing fruit of uniform maturity that many

         Table 10.2. Kinetics of Ethrel decomposition to ethylene at
         various pH values and temperatures.

                                           Half-time for ethephon
                                          decomposition to ethylene

         Temperature (°C)           pH6               pH7             pH8

         10                       70 days          14 days          7 days
         20                       10 days           2 days          1 day
         30                       30 hours         10 hours         5 hours
         40                       10 hours          2 hours         1 hour
330                                 M.E. Saltveit




                                             Fig. 10.10. Variable ripening of
                                             mature-green tomato fruit produces
                                             a ‘checkerboard’ pattern of ripe and
                                             green fruit within a box.


retailers demand (Fig. 10.10). Repacking is both expensive and damaging to
the riper, softer fruit and should be avoided.


TEMPERATURE MANAGEMENT

The optimum storage temperature that both slows ripening and also retains
the quality of fruit ripened after storage varies with cultivar and stage of ma-
turity. Mature-green fruit can be stored for 2 weeks at 12.5–15°C, ripening
fruit at 10–12.5°C for a week, and fully ripe fruit at 7–10°C for 3–5 days.
Mature-green fruit ripens best at 15–20°C, with ripening above 25°C produ-
cing soft, poorly coloured fruit.
     Both the tomato plant and the harvested tomato fruit are chilling sensi-
tive, incurring physiological damage if stored below about 12°C for durations
dependent on the cultivar, stage of maturity and prior environmental exposure
(Fig. 10.11). This sensitivity to non-freezing but chilling temperatures delin-
eates the growing season and the geographical location where tomatoes can
be grown under field conditions, and imposes a storage temperature well above
the recommended 0°C for crops that are not chilling sensitive. The rate of
many biological activities, e.g. ripening, can more than double for every 10°C
rise in temperature, and this rise in metabolic activity can halve the storage life
of chilling-sensitive crops in comparison with chilling-tolerant crops.
                         Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes                  331




                  40 –
  Heat stress       –

                  30 –
                                Ideal range for ripening
      Optimum       –           mature-green fruit
ripening range
                  20 –
                                Ideal range for storage of
                    –           mature-green fruit,
                                ripening fruit and
                  10 –
                                fully ripe fruit
     Chilling       –

                   0–

     Freezing       –

                 –10 –                                       Fig. 10.11. Temperature
                             Temperatures in °C              limitations for the proper
                                                             ripening and storage of fresh
                                                             market tomato fruit.

      Chilling injury is characterized by slow and abnormal ripening, increased
disease susceptibility (often to specific decay organisms), reduced acidity, accel-
erated water loss and surface pitting. As with other crops, the degree of chilling
sensitivity is related to the temperature the fruit were previously exposed to in
the field. Chilling can occur in the field before harvest and contribute to the
sensitivity of the fruit to chilling after harvest. Fruit grown in a hot climate
are more sensitive to chilling than are fruit grown in a cooler climate. Also,
the temperature at harvest appears to influence the level of chilling sensitivity.
Fruit harvested hot are more chilling sensitive than fruit harvested when cool.
Pre-conditioning at low, non-chilling or high heat-shock temperatures have
been used to increase tolerance of mature-green fruit to subsequent chilling.
Holding fruit at elevated temperatures may induce the heat-shock response that
is protective against subsequent chilling injury. However, the shortened shelf-
life resulting from holding the fruit at 35°C must be offset by a greater exten-
sion of storage life at what would have previously been chilling temperatures.
      Attempts to increase chilling tolerance through conventional breeding
have only slightly increased the chilling tolerance of commercial tomato cul-
tivars (Venema et al., 2005; Rugkong et al., 2010). Chilling tolerance appears
to be a multi-gene trait. The germplasm of resistant genotypes could be used to
increase chilling tolerance of commercial cultivars. However, it has proved re-
fractory to major improvements using traditional breeding to amplify existing
genes related to chilling tolerance or to the introgression of genes from related
species with greater chilling tolerance (e.g. Solanum peruvianum, S. hirsutum
and S. chilense) (Venema et al., 2005). Over the past few decades, the main focus
332                                 M.E. Saltveit


of research has been on chilling-induced wilting and impaired photosynthetic
efficiency of tomato plants; neither of which is of concern with harvested to-
mato fruit. Genetic engineering has produced lines with significantly increased
chilling tolerance, but their lack of consumer acceptance makes their commer-
cial adaptation doubtful.
      Attempts to dissect the physiological basis of chilling sensitivity has elim-
inated some possibilities (e.g. membrane phase transition) but has failed to
identify a critical physiological parameter that could be genetically manipu-
lated to produce truly chilling-resistant tomato plants and fruit (Luengwilai
et al., 2012a). Chilling does not uniformly affect genes associated with tomato
fruit ripening; some are promoted, some repressed, and some are unaffected
(Rugkong et al., 2011). Using postharvest treatments (e.g. heat-shock) that
significantly alter the chilling sensitivity of genetically identical tissue could
provide a means to dissect, through either genetic or metabolic profiling, the
genetic and physiological events responsible for chilling sensitivity. When prop-
erly done (Saltveit, 2002), the rate of ion leakage from aged excised tomato
pericarp tissue into an isotonic aqueous solution (e.g. 0.2 M mannitol) is an
excellent indicator of chilling-induced changes in membrane permeability
(Saltveit, 2005). Other indicators of chilling-induced injury (e.g. enhanced
respiration and ethylene production upon removal to warm temperatures; ab-
normal colour development and softening; increased disease susceptibility)
can be more variable and often require weeks to become obvious.
      There is a diurnal variation in chilling tolerance that appears to be gov-
erned by carbohydrate levels in tomato plants and by temperature-induced
alteration in membrane composition in fruit (Saltveit and Cabrera, 1987).
Exposure to elevated or near-chilling temperatures, i.e. temperature condi-
tioning, can increase the chilling tolerance of harvested mature-green toma-
toes (Saltveit, 2005). Since the onset of chilling injury symptoms appears to
occur only after a certain duration of chilling (the duration being dependent
on the chilling temperature, the cultivar, the growing conditions and any
prior exposure to environmental stress), interrupting long-term storage at
chilling temperatures with periods of warm non-chilling temperatures, so
that each chilling interval never exceeds that required to induce chilling in-
jury, will ameliorate the development of chilling injury symptoms (Biswas
et al., 2012). This practice of intermittent warming suffers from two major
drawbacks: increased energy costs to repeatedly warm and cool the fruit; and
increased microbial growth if condensation occurs on the cool fruit as it is
warmed by moist air.
      Heat treatments can significantly increase chilling tolerance of harvested
tomato fruit (Luengwilai et al., 2012b) but, since the effect is localized to the
heated tissue and not systemic throughout the whole fruit (Lu et al., 2010),
care must be taken to ensure that the heat treatment is uniformly applied to
all fruit and to all portions of each fruit. While the exact optimal temperature
and duration of exposure varies among cultivars and previous environmental
                    Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes               333


Table 10.3. Effect of temperature on quality and ripening of mature-green tomato
fruit. (Kader, 1986.)

                                     Days to table ripeness (stage 5)

Ripeness stage    12.5°C     15.0°C        17.5°C      20.0°C      22.5°C   25.0°C

Mature-green        18          15           12          10             8     7
Breaker             16          13           10           8             6     5
Turning             13          10            8           6             4     3
Pink                10           8            6           4             3     2


exposure, the heat-shock response is broad enough so that regional recom-
mendations may be applicable to large production areas.
     After ethylene treatment, the optimum transport and storage temperature
is 12.5–15°C. Within these limits, ripening will be faster at higher temperat-
ures (Table 10.3). Ripening of mature-green fruit will be uneven and abnormal
below 10°C, while ripening may be too fast and decay more extensive above
25°C. Since chilling injury of mature-green fruit primarily affects subsequent
ripening, riper pink fruit are almost by definition more chilling resistant than
mature-green fruit and can be stored at lower, near-chilling temperatures. The
shipping temperature for pink tomatoes will depend largely on the number of
days in transit and the degree of ripeness which the person receiving the fruit
may desire.
     High temperatures (e.g. 25–30°C) inhibit ripening. Fruit stored at these
high temperatures turn orange instead of red, because lycopene synthesis is in-
hibited above 30°C. Brief exposures of fruit on the plant to high temperatures,
as during a hot day when shaded fruit may reach 30°C, are reversible with
normal ripening proceeding at cool temperatures. A brief exposure to higher
temperatures (e.g. exposure to the full sun) can cause permanent damage, cell
death and sunscald. Exposure of harvested fruit to direct sunlight after harvest
should be avoided by coverings and shading.


CONTROLLED ATMOSPHERE

Controlled and modified atmospheres are slightly beneficial during both transit
and short-term storage but only as a supplement to proper temperature con-
trol. Atmospheres containing 3–5% oxygen and 0–3% carbon dioxide extend
storage by a few days at 12°C (Leshuk and Saltveit, 1990; Saltveit, 1997).
Reduced oxygen levels reduce the respiration rate, the production of and sen-
sitivity to ethylene, and ripening. Injury occurs at oxygen levels below 2% and
carbon dioxide concentrations above 5%. However, these values must be ap-
proached very cautiously. For example, elevated carbon dioxide atmospheres
are problematic because atmospheres containing 2% or more carbon dioxide
334                               M.E. Saltveit


have caused increased softening and uneven ripening under some conditions.
A controlled or modified atmosphere may be beneficial but only when used in
conjunction with established postharvest management practices that have es-
tablished and will maintain optimal temperature and humidity.
     Unlike many other fruit in which gas diffusion takes places over the en-
tire surface, gas diffusion in a tomato fruit occurs primarily through the stem
scar. Any impediment to gas diffusion, such as the development of unusual
amounts of corking on the stem scar or the application of excessive wax, can
significantly alter the internal gas concentrations even in a constant ambient
environment. The variable results reported for the storage of tomatoes under
modified atmospheres may have resulted from the disparity between the im-
posed ambient atmosphere and the internal atmosphere that developed as the
result of diffusion, respiration and metabolism.
     Modified atmosphere packaging can be used to produce atmospheres low
in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide which slow ripening and extend the
market life of tomato fruit. A semi-permeable plastic film is usually incorpor-
ated into a more rigid package. The combination of gas diffusion through the
film and the respiration of the tomato fruit produces and maintains a modified
atmosphere. Changes in respiration resulting from ripening (i.e. the climac-
teric) or changes in temperature can significantly alter the atmosphere in the
package. Selecting fruit of the desired maturity and maintaining the package
at the proper temperature are crucial. The semi-permeable films also allow
ethylene to accumulate and the relative humidity to reach saturation. Elevated
levels of ethylene can stimulate ripening and nullify the inhibitory effects of
the modified atmosphere on ripening. While the high relative humidity within
the package lessens water loss from the fruit, it also fosters microbial growth
since fluctuations in the storage temperature can result in water condensation
on the fruit within the package. Packets of absorbents that reduce ethylene and
water vapour in the package are useful but they add cost to an already costly
package.
     Although an atmosphere containing 5–10% carbon monoxide will re-
duce disease, its extreme toxicity has severely limited commercial application.
Carbon monoxide has slight ethylene-like activity and will promote ripening of
mature-green fruit held in air.


SUMMARY

Harvesting fruit at the proper maturity and careful handling during harvest,
transport, packing and marketing will ensure that high-quality fruit reach the
consumer. External colour changes are good indicators of the physiological
maturity of the fruit of almost all tomato cultivars. Multiple picks by hand are
common for fresh market fruit, while once-over mechanical harvesting is cus-
tomary for processing tomatoes. Cultivars with genetically modified ripening
                       Postharvest Biology and Handling of Tomatoes                     335


behaviour have extended shelf-life but additional care may be needed to ensure
that other quality attributes are also maintained after harvest. Application of
about 100 ppm (μl/l) levels of ethylene can hasten and coordinate the ripening
of mature-green fruit. Once fruit have reached the breaker stage, internally
synthesized ethylene promotes its own synthesis and sustains ripening even
when external ethylene levels are reduced to zero. Temperature management is
crucial since temperatures below about 12°C cause chilling injury and temper-
atures above about 25°C inhibit lycopene synthesis. Controlled atmospheres
have some benefit in maintaining quality, but they are usually minimal com-
pared with the benefits of avoiding physical injuries, and proper management
of temperature, relative humidity and sanitation.



REFERENCES

Abbott, J.A., Lu, R., Upchurch, B.L. and Stroshine, R.L. (1997) Technologies for non-
     destructive quality evaluation of fruits and vegetables. Horticultural Reviews 20,
     1–120. doi: 10.1002/9780470650646.ch1.
Biswas, P., East, A.R., Brecht, J.K., Hewett, E.W. and Heyes, J.A. (2012) Intermittent
     warming during low temperature storage reduces tomato chilling injury. Postharvest
     Biology and Technology 74, 71–78. doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2012.07.002.
Gupta, A., Pal, R.K. and Rajam, M.V. (2013) Delayed ripening and improved fruit
     processing quality in tomato by RNAi-mediated silencing of three homologs of
     1-aminopropane-1-carboxylate synthase gene. Journal of Plant Physiology 170,
     987–995. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2013.02.003.
Kader, A.A. (1986) Effect of postharvest handling procedures on tomato quality. Acta
     Horticulturae 190, 209–221. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.1986.190.21.
Klee, H.J. and Giovannoni, J.J. (2011) Genetics and control of tomato fruit ripening
     and quality attributes. Annual Review of Genetics 45, 41–59. doi: 10.1146/
     annurev-genet-110410-132507.
Klee, H.J. and Tieman, D.M. (2013) Genetic challenges of flavor improvement in to-
     mato. Trends in Genetics 29, 257–262. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2012.12.003.
Leshuk, J.A. and Saltveit, M.E. (1990) Controlled atmospheres and modified atmospheres
     for the preservation of vegetables. In: Calderon, M. and Barkai-Golan, R. (eds) Food
     Preservation by Modified Atmospheres. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 315–352.
Lu, J., Charles, M.T., Vigneault, C., Goyette, B. and Raghavan, G.S.V. (2010) Effect of
     heat treatment uniformity on tomato ripening and chilling injury. Postharvest
     Biology and Technology 56, 155–162. doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2010.01.005.
Luengwilai, K., Saltveit, M.E. and Beckles, D.M. (2012a) Metabolite content of harvested
     Micro-Tom tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) fruit is altered by chilling and ­protective
     heat-shock treatments as shown by GC–MS metabolic profiling. Postharvest Biology
     and Technology 63, 116–122. doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2011.05.014.
Luengwilai, K., Beckles, D.M. and Saltveit, M.E. (2012b) Chilling-injury of harvested
     tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) cv. Micro-Tom fruit is reduced by temperature
     pre-treatment. Postharvest Biology and Technology 63, 123–128. doi: 10.1016/j.
     postharvbio.2011.06.017.
336                                    M.E. Saltveit


Milczarek, R.R., Saltveit, M.E., Garvey, T.C. and McCarthy, M.J. (2009) Assessment of
     tomato pericarp mechanical damage using multivariate analysis of magnetic res-
     onance images. Postharvest Biology and Technology 52, 189–195. doi: 10.1016/j.
     postharvbio.2009.01.002.
Rugkong, A., Rose, J.K.C., Lee, S.J., Giovannoni, J.J., O’Neill, M.A. and Watkins, C.B.
     (2010) Cell wall metabolism in cold-stored tomato fruit. Postharvest Biology and
     Technology 57, 106–113. doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2010.03.004.
Rugkong, A., McQuinn, R., Giovannoni, J.J., Rose, J.K.C. and Watkins, C.B. (2011)
     Expression of ripening-related genes in cold-stored tomato fruit. Postharvest Biology
     and Technology 61, 1–14. doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2011.02.009.
Saltveit, M.E. (1997) A summary of CA and MA requirements and recommendations
     for harvested vegetables. In: Seventh International Controlled Atmosphere Research
     Conference. Volume 4: Vegetables and Ornamentals. Postharvest Horticulture Series 18.
     University of California, Davis, pp. 98–117.
Saltveit, M.E. (2002) The rate of ion leakage from chilling-sensitive tissue does not im-
     mediately increase upon exposure to chilling temperatures. Postharvest Biology and
     Technology 26, 295–304. doi: 10.1016/S0925-5214(02)00049-2.
Saltveit, M.E. (2005) Influence of heat shocks on the kinetics of chilling-induced ion
     leakage from tomato pericarp discs. Postharvest Biology and Technology 36, 87–92.
     doi: 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2004.10.007.
Saltveit, M.E. and Cabrera, R.M. (1987) Tomato fruit temperature before chilling influ-
     ences ripening after chilling. HortScience 22, 452–454.
Saltveit, M.E. and Sharaf, A.R. (1992) Ethanol inhibits ripening of tomato fruit har-
     vested at various degrees of ripeness without affecting subsequent quality. Journal
     of the American Society for Horticultural Science 117, 793–798.
Sisler, E.C., Serek, M. and Dupille, E. (1996) Comparison of cyclopropene, 1-methylcy-
     clopropene, and 3,3-dimethylcyclopropene as ethylene antagonists in plants. Plant
     Growth Regulation 18, 169–174. doi: 10.1007/BF00024378.
Stevens, M.A. (1994) Processing tomato breeding in the 90’s: a union of traditional
     and molecular techniques. Acta Horticulturae 376, 23–34. doi: 10.17660/
     ActaHortic.1994.376.1.
Suslow, T.V. and Cantwell, M. (1997) Tomato: Recommendations for Maintaining
     Postharvest Quality. Postharvest Technology Center. University of California, Davis,
     California. Available at: http://postharvest.ucdavis.edu/Commodity_Resources/
     Fact_Sheets/Datastores/Vegetables_English/?uid=36&ds=799 (accessed 23 March
     2018).
Venema, J.H., Linger, P., van Heusden, A.W., van Hasselt, P.R. and Bruggemann, W.
     (2005) The inheritance of chilling tolerance in tomato (Lycopersicon spp.). Plant
     Biology 7, 118–130. doi: 20.2055/s-2005-837495.
Zamir, D., Grandillo, S. and Tanksley, S.D. (1999) Genes from wild species for the im-
     provement of yield and quality of processing tomatoes. Acta Horticulturae 487,
     285–288. doi: 10.17660/ActaHortic.1999.487.43.
Zhang, Y., Butelli, E., De Stefano, R., Schoonbeek, H-j, Magusin, A. et al. (2013)
     Anthocyanins double the shelf life of tomatoes by delaying overripening and redu-
     cing susceptibility to gray mold. Current Biology 23, 1094–1100. doi: 10.1016/j.
     cub.2013.04.072.
