Andrew Mefferd (00:00.756)
All right, we're recording. So, all right. Today we have the pleasure of welcoming Drew Kramer to the Growing for Market podcast. Drew is in Michigan's Upper Peninsula where he runs Ghost House Farm. I mean, I think it sounded like Ghost House Farm, so I'm just going to say that again. Drew is in Michigan's Upper Peninsula where he runs Ghost House Farm with his wife, Allison Mills, and he is the vegetable maestro mechanic.

and general contractor. He also co-owns Fresh Coast Yoga and recruits constantly for the Kiwanaw Boxing Club. But what we're here to talk about today is how Drew increased his greenhouse tomato yields dramatically over the course of a couple seasons and the changes he made to do that. So without further ado, welcome to the Growing For Market Podcast, Drew.

Drew Cramer (00:57.196)
Thank you for having me, Andrew. It's a pleasure to be here.

Andrew Mefferd (00:59.694)
Yeah, well, it's a pleasure to have you. I appreciate you making time right now. You know, it's April. Actually, I think it'll be May by the time this this interview is out. But I know it's a very busy time on most farms, no doubt yours. So I appreciate you making the time to to talk with us. And before we get to the farming, I did mention when we were chatting, you submitted one of the more interesting bios anyone ever has for this podcast. So I got to ask.

Yoga and boxing. So those sound to me like very oppositional activities. you get the do the boxing to get your aggressive impulses out and then go chill out with the yoga or how do those two balance each other out or what?

Drew Cramer (01:43.36)
They're both aspects of wellness, Like flexibility and stability.

Yoga is a physical practice of that, but so is boxing. You have to stay mobile. It's also a form of practicing safety. I'm boxing with my friends, I'm not boxing with enemies, but I'm practicing self-defense. I am working on anger release with the heavy bag. And then when you're sparring with a friend, you're not actively trying to hurt them. You're trying to help each other learn how to fight better.

Andrew Mefferd (01:52.942)
Uh-huh.

Andrew Mefferd (02:16.49)
Yeah. Okay.

Drew Cramer (02:18.128)
Like they don't, they do yeah, sometimes they do like in the moment you can key in, but I've known plenty of people that get pretty fierce with their yoga practice and like there's some rage-u-jai going on.

Andrew Mefferd (02:25.692)
Ha ha ha ha

Andrew Mefferd (02:32.309)
Okay. well, yeah, it's, think it's just good to have something else. I know for, for many years, like we were farming and I was working like at Johnny's for a long time and then we had kids and I realized like after a while, like I wasn't doing anything other than farming, working in, in, in kid care. So I'm just glad to see you have some outside activities. They're, very interesting ones because I, you know, you got to have something to balance out all the, all the work we do on the farm.

Drew Cramer (03:00.95)
Yeah, the body and the mind definitely need it. And on a farm, the mountain's work is never done. And so you have to just choose to walk away from the mountain for periods of time and to not think about it. Because you could spend every waking moment working on your farm and the work would still not be done. So it's just finding times and places where you can walk away literally and mentally.

Andrew Mefferd (03:24.086)
Yeah, that's that's I've I've learned that the hard way I got very burned out. You know, a few years ago when just farming, working, kid care, work, I was also working on a book at the time. In fact, I mean, this is a total digression from what we're here to talk about today. But we we got time, right. So I'm going to I'll just say that my you know, my wife said she was like, honey, I listen to this podcast about.

burnout and dealing with burnout. think you should listen to it. well, yeah, my first impulse was like, no, like I'm like, I'm just doing the things I got to do. And then finally I was like, well, maybe I should. And so the whole, you know, the whole point of the podcast was kind of like what you're saying is that we could all work every waking hour we were are willing to be awake. And so one thing that put it in really good perspective in this podcast was that

Drew Cramer (03:54.079)
No, never me. It'll never be me.

Andrew Mefferd (04:18.65)
like whatever we do, whether it's farming or something else, know, stress builds up over the course of time. And that they in this podcast, they liken stress to mental trash. It's like, you know, your mental trash is building up. And if you don't have some way of taking it out, you're just going to build up and get gross in there. And so like for me, it became running. So, you know, that's that's the way that I work on.

I guess I'm not not consciously on balance, although you take a lot of steps with running. I I think that's good. so it became really helpful for me to have some other thing that I really wanted to do that I would be willing to sacrifice and be like, well, I could work for another hour or two. But, you know, I've already been working for eight hours today or whatever. My productivity, let's just be honest, is probably going down. I should go do something else, take out my mental trash. And I've been a lot happier.

So I hope, yeah, I hope that's how it works for you. I hope boxing and yoga helps you take out your mental trash and all the hardworking farmers in the audience. don't know. get it. Sometimes there there's times in life when you just have to buckle down and grind it out. But I hope I hope everyone can find something that excites them other other in it. And in addition to the work that they're doing, that can help them take out their their mental trash. I'm glad to hear that you have some some mental trash taking out.

Drew Cramer (05:43.5)
You

Andrew Mefferd (05:43.662)
activities that are

Drew Cramer (05:46.412)
I it's a dangerous trap that lot of us that are drawn to our professions through passion fall into. We're like, oh, if you love what you do, you'll never work a day in your life. And that's just a lie. If you love what you do, it's still work, and it's still stressful, and you need to balance it. And you need to do the things to take care of yourself.

Andrew Mefferd (05:54.348)
Yeah

Andrew Mefferd (06:05.941)
Yeah, yeah, you really do. Because farming is obviously hard work and people got to take care of themselves. I mean, that's funny. Actually, I've thought about I thought about doing a social media post about that old thing about how if you love what you'll do, you never work a day in your life of like what like one of those like, what do you think people kind of post of like it could be love what you do and you never work a day in your life or love your work and slowly learn to hate it over time.

Weigh in people, which one of it is it for you? Because I think, I mean, that's certainly, I'll go ahead and speak for my wife here too. Like I think that was our attitude when we started out. We were like, we loved it, we still love it. But you know, after doing it as a business for a certain number of years, it just, guess that's it, is I realized I needed, I was doing that almost exclusive, just like working at the exclusion of almost everything else, like hanging out with friends.

Drew Cramer (06:33.068)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (07:02.431)
I, you know, any like recreational activities I had lost. so, I realized that like you really can just even, even if you love it, you need something else, to keep, to keep from burning out and hating it in the end. And I'm, I'm glad, I'm glad I found, dunno, I guess I found that before I totally burned out and like started hating everything, but it is, it is, it is important to find it, find a balance between the work that we love and

other things in in ourselves so okay well that i think that was a was not exactly how i planned on starting this the episode but i think it was a good digression so

Drew Cramer (07:44.62)
I mean, we always need to reinforce the PSA that farmers need to take care of themselves. We are an at-risk population for mental health problems, and it's important to stress, like, take care of yourselves,

Andrew Mefferd (07:57.558)
Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's really true. In fact, I'm trying to get a guest on now who's active up in Canada with an organization that is providing mental health services to farmers and kind of like that, just trying to combat the isolation and burnout that we all know can get pretty common in farming. so I'm talking with her right now. We don't have an interview yet, but I'm really like it's a very, very important issue because like I want to know what they're doing.

what like what how they are able to offer services to people you know who are oftentimes in rural far-flung areas so hopefully we'll get her on here here soon because the struggle is real

Drew Cramer (08:35.84)
Yeah. When I was at Marble Seed, one of the booths there, it's like a farmer hotline. I forget the name of it, but it's a super simple number. And it's just for any challenges that farmers have, they can call and like, get this hotline. I'll send you the info.

Andrew Mefferd (08:54.421)
Yeah, yeah, send it to me because we did. Now, we had a we did actually have an episode. I didn't do the interview. One of our co-hosts, Katie, did the interview a while back talking with some some people who were were working through farm aid for on mental health services for farmers. And they had some hotlines and things like that. OK, in fact, we yeah, we so I mean, still send me the info in case it is different. I'll definitely try to get that out there to people.

Drew Cramer (09:09.174)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (09:14.766)
I think it's the Farm Aid hotline, yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (09:23.981)
But you know, it's a real issue that we could cover more than once, definitely. So, all right. Well, perhaps more to the point today. Can you tell us about your farm as far as acreage, crops grown, markets and all that kind of stuff?

Drew Cramer (09:34.156)
Tomatoes!

Drew Cramer (09:42.38)
Yeah, so like I think the regional context is super important too because we're up in the Keweenaw Peninsula of the Upper Peninsula which means we get 15 feet of snow every year. It's crazy. But we own about 20 acres, most of that wooded, and we've been farming about a half an acre and then just a single 30 by 80 greenhouse with an attached propagation house slash wash pack.

Andrew Mefferd (09:54.75)
Ha ha ha!

Andrew Mefferd (10:08.237)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (10:08.992)
This year we're doubling our outdoor growing space to about a full acre of outdoor beds.

And we have a lot of rocks in the soil. We have a rocky sandy loam. It's very beautiful texture once we take the rocks out. We have a hard pan layer, a naturally geologically occurring fragile pan layer, 18 inches to 24 inches down from the surface. So once that snow melts, we have spring flooding. And because it's on the sandier side of a sandy loam, once that spring melt goes away and we get our annual drought at some point during the year, we have problems with really dry soils.

It's a fun place to farm.

Andrew Mefferd (10:46.655)
Yeah, yeah. I chuckle at the at the what did you say 15 feet of snow because we I thought we got a lot of snow. We're here in central Maine and it's it historically we've gotten about 100 inches of snow a year. So only two thirds of the amount of snow that you get. But it is actually it's it's I feel like it has been going down a little bit more of our precipitation just with with the climate warming up.

Drew Cramer (11:06.529)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (11:15.661)
More of our precipitation on the shoulder seasons is coming in rain, of course. But still we get lot of snow, but not 15 feet worth.

Drew Cramer (11:25.708)
Yeah, we averaged 200 inches or so, and think this last year we got like 300. And it just didn't stop. It started snowing in November and just kept snowing. It was a long winter. And now I'm watching it melt.

Andrew Mefferd (11:34.989)
Wow, that's yeah, that's a lot of snow.

Okay, so you get a lot of snow, but you're essentially out in the middle of Lake Superior, right? Because you're on a peninsula, on a peninsula. So do you also get some lake effect? Like, do you have a warmer climate in the summertime because of that?

Drew Cramer (11:48.332)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (11:55.914)
Yeah, yeah, so we're zone 5B compared to most of the Midwest around us, which is like zone four. So I got a peach tree right outside my house. You can't have that in Minnesota where I grew up. Our winter temps are much milder than like Minneapolis or Chicago or most of the surrounding area because of the lake. We have a beautiful fall. We can usually keep growing outdoors through September.

Andrew Mefferd (12:03.574)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (12:10.207)
Yeah, yeah.

Drew Cramer (12:26.152)
October it can start snowing. But our springs are a little bit late too because that thermal battery works both directions so there's a lot of cold water out there that's still cooling the air. So it's late April. I'm hoping that my snow will be gone in the next two weeks and then that melt water will be gone within a week or two after that and then we can start getting in the fields in mid-May. That's pretty typical for us. We can start working the land in about mid-May.

Andrew Mefferd (12:48.267)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (12:52.552)
Okay, so I bet that greenhouse comes in handy. Yeah.

Drew Cramer (12:56.188)
so much and especially because like with our shoulder seasons like it we can get a freak six inches of snow so even if our night temps are only getting down to 30 degrees and you're like all right frost net it plants don't like it when there's six inches of snow on them

Andrew Mefferd (13:02.453)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (13:10.796)
No. Yeah. Okay, so I got to ask, how did you come up with the name Ghost House Farm?

Drew Cramer (13:13.42)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (13:20.236)
I thought it was just a regular term. You're like, you know how there's ghost towns? So where we live, there originally were like four houses and it was like part of a small neighborhood because there were a bunch of small copper mines in this area and every single copper mine had its own neighborhood. So what's left where we live, there's our house and there's a house 30 feet behind it.

Andrew Mefferd (13:22.828)
Yeah?

Andrew Mefferd (13:37.763)
interesting.

Drew Cramer (13:42.742)
like just as close as if you lived in a city, neighbors. And it is a white house and it's been abandoned since the 80s. We almost called our house farm the Coyote Den farm because Coyotes lived in that ghost house. But we just started calling it the ghost house and then filed the paperwork for the farm. And then I found out that nobody else calls abandoned houses ghost houses.

Andrew Mefferd (13:54.588)
Yeah

Andrew Mefferd (14:06.988)
It's a good farm name.

Drew Cramer (14:09.004)
Yeah, it's really catchy, like people see us and they're just like, Ghost House!

Andrew Mefferd (14:12.628)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, it's it's distinctive, you know, like I like all the like, you know, rolling acres, green pastures, farm names too. But like Ghost House is just is definitely a little different than.

Drew Cramer (14:26.27)
It makes branding really easy too, because we can just do black and white everything. And looks great.

Andrew Mefferd (14:32.104)
Yeah, cool. Okay. Okay. So the reason that we're talking today, in addition to all the other stuff we already talked about is because my friend Guillaume over at Arisha, which people don't know Arisha does greenhouse automation. He said that you had really good luck improving your greenhouse tomato yields, maybe even doubled them. And that's great. And maybe sounds a bit like farmer

clickbait to say like, double your yields. But I know it's possible because we did the same thing early in our greenhouse growing careers. Can I tell you really quickly what we did to double our tomato yields over a few years? And then we can really focus on what made the difference for you. Cause it sounds like the things that we did were like a lower level changes because we didn't have like, we were able to double our green, our

Drew Cramer (15:04.524)
You

Drew Cramer (15:14.124)
Please do.

Andrew Mefferd (15:30.615)
tomato yields without even like heat and automation and all those kinds of things. Most. So I'll just say for us, it was mainly increasing planting density. Like we, we went from like the first greenhouse we built, we basically planted tomatoes in it the way that we went out in the field. So we had this 30 foot wide greenhouse that we put four single rows of tomatoes in. It was like a field spacing. And so,

Drew Cramer (15:55.052)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (16:00.317)
my gosh, I look back at the pictures of that and I'm like, my gosh, there's so much unused space in that greenhouse. So we went from four single rows to ended up with five double rows. So more than doubled the planting density. you would like to think if you double the planting density, you're going to double your yield. So I think that was a big thing. But the other things that we started doing were grafting so that each plant, we got a little more out of each plant.

We switched over to mostly greenhouse varieties, which we also found were more resilient to the kind of diseases we were getting in there and got a little bit more yield. And we didn't switch entirely over to greenhouse varieties. We liked growing heirlooms. We had customers who liked buying heirlooms from us. so, I mean, it's notable, I'll say we usually noticed about, we only got about half of the yield off of our heirlooms.

than we did off of our greenhouse tomato varieties. And so like that's an example of something we could have kept going, you know, if we wanted to, if we are solely focused on yield, one obvious thing that we could have done to raise those yields even more is to cut out the heirlooms, go all greenhouse tomato varieties. But you know, at the time we were selling at farmers markets and in addition to liking the heirlooms ourselves, our customers liked them. Unfortunately, we couldn't charge twice the price that we are charging for the greenhouse varieties, even though we are only getting half the yield.

You know, just in principle, we could have kept increasing yield by getting rid of the heirlooms and increasing ventilation along with the increasing density to keep the plants healthy as we increase that density. I think those were the keys and we truly did double our yields. we, know, like I think the first year that we grew tomatoes with that set up in it, I'll say in an unheated greenhouse,

We got about a ton of tomatoes out of the hoop house. And then after a few years of implementing all those changes, we were getting over two tons of tomatoes out of a hoop house like that. so, and that's not even, know, people might be thinking like, that's not even that much yield. Like, yeah, we definitely didn't, you know, that was before we even got into heat and good climate control, like you get with an Orisha or other.

Drew Cramer (18:06.604)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (18:13.868)
You

Andrew Mefferd (18:22.345)
greenhouse automation system. so I'm definitely not saying like we solved it. We're like at the peak. was saying like, you know, we are, we are getting there. that those were, those are the things that we did. But so to, guess, to ask you about what, what you guys did, I'm, I'm just curious in the beginning, did you start talking with Guillaume because they were production challenges that you were looking to solve or just thought you could get more yield out of your greenhouses.

Drew Cramer (18:50.572)
So I think I first heard about Aresha through one of your podcast episodes. So I think it was either in 2023 or 2024. And in 2023, we had had a lot of flooding in the greenhouse. And then after that, we had disease issues all summer long. Just never stopped. We had bacterial spot all summer.

Andrew Mefferd (18:55.679)
Okay.

Andrew Mefferd (19:00.075)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (19:06.261)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (19:10.117)
yeah.

Drew Cramer (19:14.984)
And so when I heard about dehumidification of greenhouses could reduce tomato diseases, that's what really lit the light bulb. I was like, what? And then hearing about how you could increase productivity. And I think we were already grafting at that point, even before automation. But when...

you said that you could potentially double your yields year over year. I'm going to say that's actually an understatement. We increased production by like 2.5 just year over year.

Andrew Mefferd (19:46.548)
Yeah.

Well, I'm glad to hear you say it. believe it. Yeah, that's it. That's it. It's one of those things of like, I don't know. I know it's totally possible. I also, I don't know. There's so much clickbait and exaggeration in the world. also like, I like try to, I don't know. I also don't want to say things that are going to make people be like, is that like, is that just a sales line or something? But so, okay. So

Drew Cramer (20:13.556)
I like so and like we we already had close to optimal spacing of our tomatoes. I think we increased density a little bit, especially on like the southern bed, which we can talk about later. But so like, we more than doubled our yields per square foot, but I'll tell you, we did not double our yields per hour of labor. Like that is like a main thing is like there.

Andrew Mefferd (20:18.827)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (20:24.288)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (20:37.846)
There's no such thing as a free lunch. so if you want to grow more food, you've to do more something.

Andrew Mefferd (20:43.677)
Yeah, right, right. Okay, so because you got well, I guess you said that you your density was pretty good. But yeah, I mean, that's that's a good point is that you can if you double the number of plants in your greenhouse, you're also like you may double yields, you've also got more work to do. So

Drew Cramer (21:00.972)
Yeah, I mean, we increased the rate that the plants were growing by 250 % as well. So that nearly tripled the pruning and trellising work that we were doing weekly. The taller those plants get, the more time that work takes. So like in 2023, when our tomatoes weren't growing very well, we did most of our pruning and trellising on the ground and only got the ladders out in the last couple of weeks. And in 2024, we got ladders out in June.

Andrew Mefferd (21:11.732)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (21:28.548)
Yeah. But the good thing that goes along with that is that if you're speeding up, of course, if you're speeding up the rate that your plants are growing, hopefully they're also, you know, you're speeding up the number of clusters that they're growing, you know, every week. So, yeah, more work, but some of that work is picking the things that you're selling. So.

Drew Cramer (21:42.487)
yeah. Yeah.

Drew Cramer (21:48.226)
yeah, yeah. And it's still worth it. Like we run enterprise budgets. We're looking at how much money goes into the labor component of our tomato operation. And it's definitely worth it. Like we're growing more tomatoes per labor hour and more tomatoes per like initial investment of putting in the beds and of the propane heating. And yeah, it specs out pretty nice on calculations.

Andrew Mefferd (22:13.075)
Okay, good. Yeah, that well, that's a that's an important calculation to have to see that you're getting more per labor hour. I mean, that's what you would want to see, right? Say like, okay, we have more plants that are growing faster. So we do have to do more work. if if like, that's a good ratio, right? If you're getting if if you're getting more per hour worked, that's that's what you want to see. So

Drew Cramer (22:33.644)
Because with our farm, our initial bottleneck was space. We just did not have enough space to grow enough food to be able to make a living. And so we really focused in on what are the most value-dense crops per square foot. And then as we have opened up more space, now it's like, OK, what are the crops that are actually the most value-dense per labor hour? And then we need to look at these two metrics, because we're still space limited. We've got an acre.

Andrew Mefferd (22:47.637)
Uh-huh.

Andrew Mefferd (22:58.592)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (23:00.256)
So I'm not going to be a wheat farmer. And so we're trying to figure out, what crops are value dense enough per square foot, and then how much time does it take? And I don't. Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (23:10.559)
Yeah. So what crops did you land on? What crops made the cut for your value determination?

Drew Cramer (23:17.436)
We started off and we still have a focus on triple washed salad mix, early season tomatoes and early season cucumbers. We have a pretty robust farmers market network up here. get good attendance, like people have been building the community for a while, but those were gaps in our markets. Like I remember...

Andrew Mefferd (23:25.355)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (23:32.085)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (23:42.156)
The naive me in 2021 went to the farmers market in July and like at 11 30 a.m. I was like there's there's no tomatoes here like what's going on and little did I know that our market gets like the 10 a.m. rush like hundreds of people come in and like of course there's no tomatoes by 11 30 in July like but it's yeah we tried to go in and see what was missing in the local sphere and what could supply that also fit those like value considerations.

Andrew Mefferd (23:58.252)
Andrew Mefferd (24:07.092)
Uh-huh.

Andrew Mefferd (24:10.923)
Yeah, yeah. Well, that's that's very smart. mean, that's a very similar thing happened to us and that we like it's a long story. We originally started our farm in Pennsylvania, but due to a of circumstances, we bounced around and ended up up here in Maine. And so the the farmers market that we ended up doing in the town that's five miles away from where we are. When we got into that market, there was a lot of greens production. Nobody.

had season extended fruiting crops, know, like tomatoes and cucumbers, right? And that, mean, that was kind of like what my obsession anyway. and plus we had just moved from a much warmer climate in Pennsylvania up here to Maine. And so that's where we were like, all right, we're going to build green houses and we're going to be the, we're going to be the extended season fruiting crop people. And that's kind of like the, the niche that we held down at our farmers market for many years.

Drew Cramer (24:46.976)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (25:04.48)
Yeah, it works pretty well for us. It definitely has its own learning hurdles for sure.

Andrew Mefferd (25:12.457)
Yeah. So are you are those tomatoes, cucumbers and lettuce sharing greenhouse space or is the greenhouse for tomatoes and cucumbers?

Drew Cramer (25:17.492)
salad. Yeah.

Drew Cramer (25:23.948)
In the summertime, tomatoes, cuques, and then we also do like the shoulder beds that are too short for the tomatoes and cuques. We do one of those in peppers and one of those in cut flowers. And then we flip the beds in late September, early October, and then we put in salad mix for the winter. And then we overwinter that stuff. Still fine-tuning which things can survive with what types of row cover. But I think we got it almost figured out. And we used to...

Andrew Mefferd (25:46.943)
Mm-hmm.

You have it!

Drew Cramer (25:52.641)
We used to interplant lettuce with the tomatoes and cucumbers and get a harvest off of them, but now our tomatoes grow too fast and our lettuce transplants get shaded out and don't get to harvestable size.

Andrew Mefferd (26:03.688)
Well, I guess that's kind of a good problem to have.

Drew Cramer (26:06.142)
Yeah, like we've put month old to make lettuce underneath our two month old tomatoes and didn't work.

Andrew Mefferd (26:12.52)
Yeah, OK.

Okay, so and it's a heated greenhouse? Yeah, okay.

Drew Cramer (26:22.048)
Yeah, yeah, propane heat with the Aresha automations. We tried heating without Aresha for a season, and that was not great.

Andrew Mefferd (26:27.166)
Mm-hmm. OK, so.

Andrew Mefferd (26:34.13)
Yeah, yeah. Well, yeah, we, yes, we've done that too. I like, you know, it's, I feel like probably just the savings in fuel of having some kind of automation will probably just pay for itself. Not to mention, you know, the better plant growth that you get with automation, just because I think that the kind of thermostats, you know, like we used to run, we used to run our

Drew Cramer (26:37.502)
You

Andrew Mefferd (27:01.972)
greenhouse heater without one of those round wall thermostats, which is like better than nothing. I mean, that's been the way it's been on many farms and still is for many years, it's definitely, you know, it's gonna make very big changes. know, it's not very fine-tunable, that system, I guess, is what I would say.

Drew Cramer (27:05.293)
Yep.

Drew Cramer (27:24.062)
and it makes a warm, moist environment where diseases propagate and spread fast. We had a house thermostat in our greenhouse for the first season and it caused a lot of problems.

Andrew Mefferd (27:27.4)
Yeah, yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (27:35.069)
Yeah. Okay, well, let's start there. obviously, if you can cut down on diseases, your crops are going to do better. Okay, so if you went from creating a warm moist environment with a house thermostat and heating, was it as simple as just installing the Arisha and letting the...

programs run or how did you dry out that air or do whatever you did to get a handle on the disease problems?

Drew Cramer (28:03.188)
Yeah, we upgraded our exhaust fan as well and we put the automated roll-up sides. So we had been hand cranking the roll-up sides before that. And so the way the system works is if it knows it's too humid, it'll vent out that warm moist air and then draw in fresh cold air and then heat that up. And because of the way humidity works in the air, that gives you relatively drier air. And so I'll do cycles of that. Whereas before the...

Andrew Mefferd (28:23.146)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (28:30.942)
heater only functioned if it was cold and so that moist air just stayed inside all the time. And so the system coordinates the balance of bringing in fresh air, opening up the sides, and running the heater and doing that dance. And then doing that dance not only when it's too cold but also during the day if it's chilly outside and it's not chilly in the greenhouse. like deciding when to open the sides, how much wind to run the fans, and how much

Andrew Mefferd (28:35.625)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (28:57.888)
doing all of that juggle to keep your plants in the optimal 10 degree window for that particular hour, for that particular month, for that particular stage of growth, and if it's sunny cloudy or partly sunny.

Andrew Mefferd (29:10.396)
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. yeah, that definitely checks out with our, our experience too, cause I know we, our greenhouses were very humid, before they were, they were automated and we would get botrytis great, which is also known as gray mold, just forming on like any wounds on the plant or even the, like the blossoms, you know, you, we would see the, the, the blossom of the tomato,

as it was forming. One other thing that would happen is that things in the greenhouse are just stickier when it's more humid. And so what we had noticed is that when it was really humid in there, the blossoms would stick on the developing fruits and the blossoms would also get botrytis sometimes, because they're dead. Once they've done their job and the tomato's pollinated, of course, the petals fall off.

Drew Cramer (29:58.381)
Yeah, yeah.

Drew Cramer (30:08.758)
You

Andrew Mefferd (30:10.154)
And so people may or may not know. but but right. This is really good at attacking dead or dying plant tissue. And so, you know, those tomato flower petals go from being a living part of the plant to, I guess you would say senesced. They've they've done their job with the plant. And so then they want to fall off. But when it's really humid, they would actually sometimes stick to the tomatoes because it was humid. They would get petriotis. And sometimes that petriotis would actually work its way back into the.

Drew Cramer (30:17.097)
Okay.

Andrew Mefferd (30:38.214)
Into the tomatoes themselves. So that was like a that was like a two thing a twofer for us When we started drying out the air is that not only did the the blossoms fall off more reliably but they also didn't get botrytis so whether they were stuck to the The the fruit or had fallen down on a leaf below there or something like we would get a lot of botrytis infections where tomato Petals would fall onto a leaf

Drew Cramer (30:38.229)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (30:51.584)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (31:03.902)
get botrytis and then the botrytis would, we would get these botrytis spots on the leaves where, like I thought of them as little zombies, you know, like flying around the greenhouse, just spreading botrytis. And so that's, that's one thing that we noticed is that we had less of them sticking to the fruits and less of them getting botrytis once, once we dried out the air in there. Okay. So, okay. And I think maybe it's,

Drew Cramer (31:08.374)
Yeah.

Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (31:33.276)
It's worth pointing out here if people don't know this or haven't thought about it that one, I think one thing you're talking about with drying out the air is how that warmer air has a more moisture holding capacity. so when you go, just the act of taking that air and heating it up will actually.

reduce the relative humidity. Even if you don't vent it. What you're talking about of heating and venting is the ideal situation, but even without the venting, if you just turn on a heater and heat up the same body of air, the relative humidity will drop because you've increased the moisture carrying capacity of that air when you heat it up. So that's one thing I noticed when I look at our Orisha system. It has temperature.

on there and it also has the relative humidity of the air. And you'll notice anytime the heater comes on and the temperature starts going up, that the relative humidity will drop. it does that all day long, it just goes like that of heating the air up and the relative humidity dropping and then it cooling off and then the relative humidity will go up again, which is why it's so important to do what you said as far as.

both heating and venting some air because ultimately if you're not also opening the vents on your greenhouse, it's just gonna see saw all day long. The air will stay humid. And I think one of the best things about automation is that it's very hard. I find it very hard as a grower to turn the heat and the vents on at the same time. Because even though I know it's a good thing, it's...

Drew Cramer (33:16.397)
You

Andrew Mefferd (33:20.219)
It's counterintuitive, right? Cause you're like, I'm blowing all the, I'm blowing all that like heat that I just paid for right out the, the, the vents, but it's definitely worth it in, in, well, I mean, I, I mean, it sounds like you think it is. think it is, as far as being able to control that humidity, because you know, you will spend doing heating and venting at the same time. You'll spend more money on propane.

or whatever your fuel is, but your plants will grow so much better and you'll have so much less disease too. It's one of those things, it's worth it to pay for a little bit more fuel to get that air dried out. It's also just hard to do with any degree of precision, right? As a human, could be like, could, I mean, theoretically you could manually flip your heater on.

manually open your vents and monitor the humidity and let them run until it comes down. But nobody has test time for that, you know.

Drew Cramer (34:25.357)
Well, and like, as a human, you cannot keep the temperature window of your greenhouse as precise as an automation can. Especially like, it's usually not fully sunny, and so the sun's hiding behind a cloud and the sun's coming out. And I watch my roll-up sides. I'm tempted to actually take a day off sometime and just watch them. But I look at my graphs occasionally and I see that my sides have gone up and down hundreds of times.

Andrew Mefferd (34:43.369)
You

Ha ha ha ha.

Andrew Mefferd (34:52.104)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (34:52.371)
and I can see that my my temperature has stayed between 70 and 75 this whole time whereas before that like I get an alert on my phone I'm like crap it's 95 in the greenhouse let me go open the sides and then I get an alert on my farm a half hour later and it's 60 in my greenhouse let me go close the sides and like just tempered plants do not like a 30 40 degree temperature swing

Andrew Mefferd (35:16.123)
Yeah, well that's a really good point is plants are living things just like we are. don't want to have these. It does not make them happy to have huge temperature swings. so same thing on our farm is that we have field production that's not close to our greenhouses. And so it's like there's no way we could be coming back to the greenhouse every time the weather changes to make a change. And of course we didn't.

You know, most days, before we got automation, most days it was like roll the sides up in the morning and roll them back down at night. know, kind of like whatever happened in between happened. And so it is, it is really nice to know that there's a little computer brain there now that's yeah. Like you said, making those little adjustments all day long. And it's not even like rolling up all the way and rolling down all the way. You yeah, it's like making, making adjustments.

all day long to promote the airflow to respond to like, the clouds went in front of the sun. OK, let's roll the sides down for a while. Sun came back out. OK, let's roll them back up. It's so nice not to have to be stressing about all that stuff when you're out on another part of the farm.

Drew Cramer (36:28.887)
Yeah, or even like when you're at market and you get that alarm that your greenhouse is 95 degrees and you're like, I got two more hours of market. I hope I still have a crop when I get home. Like that's not fun.

Andrew Mefferd (36:42.697)
Yes, yeah, mean, almost almost every year we would have, I mean, even beyond the tomatoes and everything, we would just have greenhouse greenhouse disasters as far as yeah, like particularly with seedlings. And, you know, we didn't realize how sunny it was going to be or, you know, some they don't get the weather forecast 100 percent right. so most years, I mean, that's that's one of the reasons that my wife still has a nursery business is because we we would I mean.

not only is it a good business model that a lot of farms have is to sell seedlings in the springtime, but we also would grow, you know, twice as many of a lot of the things that we needed thinking like, well, if we have a greenhouse disaster, then hopefully we still have enough the plants that are that are greenhouse needs. So did that was that successful in bringing down? What did you say? Bacterial spec or bacterial spot or basically like bacterial spot? Did that work to cut down on the that disease?

Drew Cramer (37:31.723)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (37:37.774)
Yeah, we had one variety of tomato that still had some bacterial spot in 2024, but none of the other varieties did and that one had less of it than the previous year. And I assume there was a pretty high bacterial load in the soil from how bad it was the year before. And in 2025 we didn't have any disease issues. We had the occasional botrytis on like a

Andrew Mefferd (37:47.977)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (37:53.745)
Yeah, yeah, it does sound like it.

Drew Cramer (38:06.217)
a leaf stem that had been snapped off and there was too much leftover material. But we actually found even when that botrytis sometimes had moved from the leaf stem into the vine, we could carve it out with a knife and the vine would dry off and heal and recover. So I don't think we lost a single vine to the botrytis even though we would occasionally have like a spot of it moving in.

Andrew Mefferd (38:07.228)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (38:18.953)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (38:28.433)
Yeah, okay. that's great. Yeah, that that is a great tip. You know, people definitely can, you know, if they see a botrytis infection can do like kind of like carve it out. I mean, like one, I don't know if people obviously it helps a lot if you have dry air, like it sounds like that succeeds a lot better, right? Because of course, if you have really humid air, like like I know we had at certain times, you know, there's also like if you see those little botrytis, if you see a botrytis forming,

on damaged plant parts or the tomato petals or whatever. If you see that gray mold, you know that that's putting off spores. And so there's spores landing and wounds on plants are particularly susceptible to botrytis. And it's going to develop if you've got a wound and there's spores and it's humid. Whereas like you're saying, if it's dry, you're giving the plants a fighting chance to heal that wound before it gets infected with botrytis.

Drew Cramer (39:28.365)
because we tried with bacterial spot, removing all the leaves that had spot, which apparently does not work. We would go in every week and just be taking out all these damaged leaves and then my indigo cherry drops would just be a stem with some fruit on it. And so it's fun to know what interventions actually do work sometimes. Like, I could just carve away the diseased material and the plant will likely make it.

Andrew Mefferd (39:41.019)
Yeah!

Andrew Mefferd (39:51.419)
Yeah, yeah

Drew Cramer (39:55.019)
Not all infections are that generous.

Andrew Mefferd (39:57.613)
No. In fact, I did hear a tip one time. A grower told me that if you take root shield powder, which is acceptable for organic production, I'm pretty sure this is an, well, he told me that if you have botrytis, you know, for whatever reason, you're not able to control humidity and things are going poorly. He recommended, you know, carving out the, the,

Betrides infected wound like you you are mentioning and then rub a little root shield in there because I guess whatever root shield is Can work against betrides because there's not really Like unless they've come out with something new. There's not really a spray or anything I mean besides the fact you don't really want to be spraying in a greenhouse in the first place I would see that this in most cases like a last resort

You know, there's a lot of reasons you don't really want to be spraying in a greenhouse But even if even if you love spraying in a greenhouse, there's my understanding is there's not really a product that's effective against petritis and so You know, that's one of the problems reasons why petritis is so Such a problem is because it's it's more or less endemic, know Like it's such a wide plant disease. The spores are basically everywhere. But then also there's not really anything, you know, there's no there's no but right

Drew Cramer (40:56.717)
You

Drew Cramer (41:01.005)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (41:17.86)
spray or anything that I'm aware of. you're kind of left to deal with it with, you know, cultural methods as far as like drying out the air and good sanitation and all that kind of stuff. Okay. So you dried out the air and

Andrew Mefferd (41:39.183)
Are there, okay, so in your automation system is controlling the heat and syncing up the vents. so I'm gonna just assume that you're, that probably the heating and venting made your tomatoes grow a lot faster like you were talking about. Are there any other, are there any other changes that you think contributed to that?

that them growing so much faster.

Drew Cramer (42:09.889)
Yeah, irrigation. We used to run just like timers and we would run it for like an hour at a time and then...

harkening back to our sandy loam, if you water for an hour at a time most of that water just goes down and away. It does not stay in the top soil. We started using Aresha to irrigate and then they even improved their software year over year. So now the system modulates the irrigation based off of the month, the number of hours of daylight there are in that month, the stage of growth of the plants. We tell it how many leaves each plant has because that affects their how much

Andrew Mefferd (42:23.815)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (42:48.469)
water they're uptaking and then if it's sunny or not or partly cloudy and so like open up the system it's like it watered for 11 times today for one minute and 13 seconds. So precision watering we have almost no fruit crack issues like the fruits hardly ever splitting and we once the plants are established we almost never have signs of drought stress or over watering.

Andrew Mefferd (43:17.18)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (43:18.017)
The first few weeks it takes more handholding because the baby plants don't have roots set up in the ground yet. So we still go around and hand water the baby plants for the first couple of weeks. And then sometimes as they're getting their roots set, we have to tell her, should have water more.

Andrew Mefferd (43:27.025)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (43:34.445)
It's like, you only have four leaves, so you only need 10 % of your water. And it's like, well, the soil is still evaporating, so let's do a little more. But it's got a feedback mechanism in the software now where it asks you, how is your plants doing? Maybe you need to water more if they look like they need water.

Andrew Mefferd (43:39.016)
haha

Andrew Mefferd (43:48.425)
yeah, that's so cool. Yeah, because I know just from, you know, visiting a lot of greenhouses over the years that for a long time they've had, I don't think it's right to call it an algorithm, but it's just like a correlation of like how many milliliters to add per unit of sunlight.

Because if you think about it, of course, on a cloudy day, if we were doing a good job, we would not ideally not just be running the same program. Same thing. We were on timers for a long time. And a lot of times, what I would do is just look at the weather. if I saw it was going to be cloudy all day long, I would just turn the timer off or put it on rain setting or whatever to make it not water.

Drew Cramer (44:27.372)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (44:46.152)
and figure that the previous day's irrigation would probably bring it through the day because plants aren't going to use nearly as much water when it's cloudy as when it's sunny. yeah, it's so much. I don't know exactly what program they're running to do the irrigation at Orisha, but I mean, it's kind of nice to not need to know. Most of the automation systems, I guess that's the point of automation is you can either

Drew Cramer (45:07.872)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (45:16.016)
have timers and have to set everything yourself or you can get an automation system that will just have a watering program. And it's so nice once again, to be able to like, if you have an off farm job, like I used to, like, you know, you're at the farmer's market all day long, you know that there, so I guess just to explain for people who haven't used one of these systems is that it has more or less like a weather station that is taking note of all the temperature

how much sun the greenhouse is receiving, the full climate, including humidity and all that kind of stuff. so it'll basically notice how much sunlight your greenhouse is getting in, like you said, on sunnier days. It will give them more water in pulses, smaller irrigations. Because when we had a timer, I still tried to do this, but it wasn't.

It was imperfect. so if people don't know there, is a name for that type of irrigation. We call it pulse irrigation. Basically of like doing multiple smaller irrigation. So the example would be like in our, in our example, like with our well flow and all that kind of stuff during in like, once we got to full plant size in the summertime, I would usually just set a timer to water for an hour. our, like we had a timer that would do for

for irrigation, right? So I would set it up to do four, four irrigations of 15 minutes to get the plants the hour that it seemed just from my own experience like they needed. And I would also set that timer. So like a good rule of thumb for greenhouse growing is not to water within a couple hours of sunrise or sunset, right? Because, that's like you said, that's gonna help with the splitting because you only wanna, particularly tomatoes,

You don't want to put water on the tomatoes when they're not using it, when they're not actively respiring and basically being hit by the sun. And so that's why we would wait until at least a couple hours after sunrise to start those irrigations. And we would stop irrigating, let's say two hours before sunset because same, we didn't want water pooled at the roots when the sun went down because tomato plants, you know, they try to bank when they have extra water, they try to bank it.

Andrew Mefferd (47:43.592)
in the fruits, is what will cause that splitting. And so we were able to grow varieties that I think of as pretty prone to splitting, like a lot of the heirlooms and things like sun gold and stuff like that. We are able to grow very split susceptible varieties by just breaking up those watering into pulses of irrigations instead of just one big, hour irrigation. I mean, that's a tip right there for people. If people aren't

If people aren't automated, you know, it's like you can, you can do some of this stuff without automation. It's going to be even nicer. Like you, you know, you said where it's it's breaking it up like even more throughout the day and really only applying it when it's sunny. So you can do, you know, you can probably have less split fruits. Like if you're having problems with tomato splitting just by breaking, you know, getting a timer and breaking, breaking your, however much water you think you need to give your plants up into.

into multiple irrigations over the course of the day, avoiding the beginning and the end of the day. then, know, like automation is just going to do it even better since it's going to be in response to the environmental conditions.

Drew Cramer (48:51.629)
If you're doing it with a timer and you need to remember to go out every day and change the timing frequency based off of the weather prediction for the day, you're just not going to do it every day. And any time that your irrigation protocol doesn't match up to the plant's actual needs, that's loss in productivity.

Andrew Mefferd (49:09.829)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (49:10.869)
So you can increase your productivity of your greenhouse by doing pulse-based irrigation on your own with a timer. And you could do better with an automated system. Yeah, we didn't know about not watering before sunset because I was always told, like, water your plants at night when the sun's not shining.

Andrew Mefferd (49:22.533)
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And I-

Andrew Mefferd (49:32.305)
Uh-huh.

Drew Cramer (49:33.417)
is something I learned early on and took a while to get out of my head. And so we would water our greenhouse like in the evening and when they did not need the water. And it's made it extra humid too. Like, yay, wet soil for the night. Great idea.

Andrew Mefferd (49:46.796)
Oh my gosh. Oh yes, that must have been, I can see. right. Yeah, that must have been so humid. Cause I mean, that might be good advice if you're like thinking about watering your lawn in a very arid climate or something like, exactly. Like that's what you would do to make things as wet and humid as possible. that would mission accomplished there. But yeah, it's like, that's a really good, that's a really good example of how it's like.

sometime advice for other parts of the farmer garden. Like don't actually make sense for a greenhouse because you're going to be making it so humid in there. In fact, I have a guy, actually a good friend right now. I won't say who it is, but I'm sure he listens to the podcast. In fact, he had a farm down in Texas. so this was like 15 years ago when I was working at Johnny's and part of my

I mean, my main job was to run trials on tomatoes and greenhouse tomato varieties. But also if I would, I would just help troubleshoot people's problems when they, they like called up and, we're like, I'm having such and such a problem. And so, yeah, I get this guy from Texas who was like having like the worst tomato splitting problems I've ever seen. know, it's like talking to him about what he's doing and all like made sense. And finally, I was like, I was like,

What's your watering situation like? And he was like, I water every two hours, 24 hours a day. And I was like, well, there's your problem. And so sure enough, he stopped watering at night and no more split tomatoes. So that's a good example of that. Although, know, you may know this Drew, but I'm just going to point this out for other people is that there's

a good reason not to overwater even crops that aren't going to split like cucumbers, for example, just because in addition to the splitting issue with tomatoes, there's standing water on the roots of a plant is when they're most susceptible to root diseases. fact, like you'll notice this, maybe not with your Sandy Loam, but people will notice this in like out in the field. Like if you have a low spot or a poorly drained spot in a field,

Andrew Mefferd (52:03.663)
And you get a big rain, especially if there's there's standing water, you know how sometimes like you get a big rain and you can see you can see where water is pooled. Well, if you have root diseases like Pythium or Phytophthora or anything like that, it will tend to start in those low spots because that's what like those a lot of the root diseases that our plants are susceptible to. They are more able to attack your plant in standing water.

And also because the plants not very happy because the roots need some, the roots are basically drowning when they're sitting in standing water. so that's why people will notice that out in the field and same thing. what we were just talking about, about not wanting to overwater the plants and not have standing water at the roots, it's especially important with tomatoes with the splitting issue, but it really, it applies to all crops. Like if people are,

overwatering and noticing root diseases, they'll tend to notice less root diseases if they can have more drying between irrigation events. So just want put that out there for people. It's not just tomatoes that they want to be judicious with the watering about. mean, even leafy crops like lettuce, you'll see less bottom rot.

And in all, you know, all the rots that happen, there's a few different ones that actually look similar and can be hard to tell apart, but you'll have less of the, of the, rots that start at the base of the lettuce and in like, in, in can end up rotting the whole plant. If you, if you just like let things dry out from time to time.

Drew Cramer (53:49.773)
But everybody loves picking up rotten lettuce. It's just a nice texture.

Andrew Mefferd (53:52.007)
yeah.

Yeah, actually, that's it's really funny in in in Europe. They like here in like in the States, you know, people usually display their lettuce rights like what I think of his right side up with, you know, that the leaves of the lettuce up a lot of places in Europe, they'll actually they'll display it the other the other way over with the bottom facing up. And I always wondered if that was if that.

Drew Cramer (54:26.125)
That's where the damage is gonna be if it's there, so...

Andrew Mefferd (54:28.454)
Yeah, I wonder if it was like people almost like a way of showing of the farmers showing their customer like it's it's like it's healthy buy it. Yeah. Okay. And so another thing I'm like, I'm just thinking about we are talking about

Drew Cramer (54:35.693)
Heh heh heh heh... Yeah, no slimy bits here!

Andrew Mefferd (54:50.79)
Both how hard it is to run the heater and the vents at the same time But also how how important that can be for the disease aspect, but I'm guessing that probably also made your tomatoes grow faster because Yeah, okay. Well like one thing That like in addition to to solve like solving a lot of disease problems if you can dry out your air like one thing that some people Don't think about too much. Is that plant plant?

Drew Cramer (55:03.221)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (55:19.148)
respiration is essentially is passive, right? You we've got these lungs. We can we can pull the air in and push it out. Right. Whereas plants don't have lungs. Newsflash, you know, so plants really the only control they have is to open and close the stomata, the little, you know, the little holes in their leaves that exposes that, you know, the interior of the plant to.

Drew Cramer (55:32.883)
You

Andrew Mefferd (55:47.013)
to the air and that's why when it gets really hot, when it gets too hot, plants will close their stomata to try to keep from losing moisture too fast. the point is that if you've got that really humid air built up from heating your greenhouse and not venting some air, is that if your greenhouse is anywhere near 100 % relative humidity, your plants are not transpiring.

The plants depend on there being a differential in the amount of humidity outside of the plant. They depend on the air outside of the plant being able to take on some more moisture to let moisture to respire. Because that's what there's an unbroken chain going from the stomata of your plants all the way down to the roots. Right? And so really, the way that your plants are able to

to draw moisture out of the ground. You might know this, but I just want to say this in case people don't realize this for their plants being able to breathe essentially is that there needs to be some room for some moisture in the air for your plants to be able to respire. Because if your plant has opened the stomata, it wants to exchange some moisture, wants to let

let some of that moisture that originally came from the roots out so it can draw some more moisture up from the roots. It needs to let some of that moisture out of the stomata. And so of course, if your greenhouse is a hundred percent relative humidity or anywhere close to it, it can open those stomata, but no moisture is going to come out. so that's, know, that like people may have noticed this and not even know what they're seeing. Like I would notice if we had a few overcast days in a row,

The plants would kind of start to look weak and start to look yellowish. And part of that is because they're not really cycling. They're not able to, if you have these humid days, especially if you're heating and you're not releasing humidity, the humidity can get very high in your greenhouse. You'll notice condensation everywhere, which isn't good for plant diseases either. those plants aren't, if they...

Andrew Mefferd (58:10.586)
The humidity is really high in your greenhouse. Your plants can't let any moisture out through those stomata, which also means if they're not letting moisture out through their stomata, it means they're not bringing new moisture in along with fertility and all the other stuff. You need to keep a conveyor belt going in your plant, of moisture leaving the plants through the stomata in order for them to be able to draw more moisture up. In fact, that's what I mean about a conveyor belt.

It's the moisture leaving through those leaves that's creating a suction inside the plant for it to be able to draw in more moisture through the roots. That's why people will notice their plants slow down in addition to lack of sun when it is really humid. Yeah, Drew.

Drew Cramer (58:53.549)
Questions for you, Drew.

Drew Cramer (59:02.135)
So does that moisture cycle tie into their air exchange? Does that affect how they're taking in CO2 and giving off oxygen? Does affect that rate?

Andrew Mefferd (59:12.966)
I think that's that is actually a different system. mean, I'm not 100 % sure to tell you the truth, but I I think that's I think there's one system, you know, where they're they're they're

Drew Cramer (59:23.937)
Vapor exchange and a different one for gas exchange.

Andrew Mefferd (59:26.584)
Yeah, because I mean, although I'm glad that you brought that up. Actually, we should ask Yom about that. the reason I say that is because, mean, that brings up another very good point is that when like, because we like before we had heat and automation on cloudy days, particularly in the shoulder seasons, you know, we would keep those greenhouses up, closed up tight to thinking like, we're like conserving like we're not getting very much heat on this day. Let's conserve as much heat as possible.

Drew Cramer (59:32.161)
You

Andrew Mefferd (59:56.134)
But also what happens is like, I think one of the things you're getting at is that plants, you know, they also need carbon dioxide. And so when you have a greenhouse that's packed full of plants and they're, you you got to think of carbon dioxide like fertility that they take out of the air. And so if you have a greenhouse full of plants,

that are essentially eating the carbon dioxide out of the air, that carbon dioxide will also drop over the course of the day. Yet another good reason to vent that air because the replenished air will be higher in carbon dioxide because once again, plant growth will slow down or stop as the carbon dioxide level gets depleted in the greenhouse when you have it closed up tight for a long period of time. Since the plants are taking it out,

and they're putting off oxygen, right? It's great for us. That's the way we want the whole ecosystem to work. But if they're not getting any fresh air, they are also not getting any new carbon dioxide. And that's why if you have a carbon dioxide meter on your greenhouse and you keep it closed up, you'll watch that carbon dioxide level drop. I mean, one way to deal with that is ventilation. Some greenhouses also add carbon dioxide actually.

And that you're like, that's a whole nother thing, but we don't have to get into. like, that's why they do that, right? It's because, you know, ventilation can help. I guess that's not only can you actually achieve a higher rate, that's sort of like a next level practice to be adding carbon dioxide to the greenhouse. But

That can be a backup also for times when it's really cold and you really don't want to do a of air circulation is to add carbon dioxide. One really cool thing that I haven't seen really trickle down to smaller sized greenhouses is that they have, there is some technology to scrub the carbon dioxide out of fuels that people are burning. I actually want to check on this and see if there's been any movement on this because

Andrew Mefferd (01:02:20.601)
The last I heard it was a pretty big unit that you basically have to have something. I mean, it's a really cool idea if you think about one of our problems right now is we're putting too much carbon dioxide into the environment. Wouldn't that be amazing? I mean, that would be a best case scenario is that we could capture the carbon. yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah, and use it for plant growth. So, and the major thing like.

Drew Cramer (01:02:24.813)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (01:02:38.349)
pump it right back in. Yeah, pump it right back.

Andrew Mefferd (01:02:46.817)
I've been in bigger greenhouses that have those kinds of systems. that reminds me, I would love to check in with that industry and see, because my understanding was it was a pretty big, expensive piece of equipment that was bigger and more expensive than most people with a single greenhouse could really do. But on the other hand, a lot of technology is progressing pretty fast. mean, that would be amazing.

if they could get it small and affordable enough that everybody who was, you know, burning anything to heat a greenhouse could just recapture the carbon and pump it back in the greenhouse and make their plants happy.

Drew Cramer (01:03:24.043)
Yeah, along that line, one of the things that we're trying to trial out this year is a biomethane digester. And to feed it, the trimmings from the tomatoes we're pruning every single week. So if we can take those trimmings and put them in a biomethane digester to then make methane to heat the greenhouse, we'll see. Yeah, it will never produce enough to do all of its heating, but if we can offset some of its dehumidification cycles with

Andrew Mefferd (01:03:34.789)
You

Andrew Mefferd (01:03:44.101)
yeah, that would be amazing.

Drew Cramer (01:03:52.781)
basically a waste product, it'd be kind of cool.

Andrew Mefferd (01:03:55.074)
Yeah, grow the leaves and then use the leaves to grow more leaves. Beautiful. do you... Yeah, right, right. I guess the tomatoes were not that interesting. Well, we need some leaves, but we need more fruit. So is this the methane digester? Is that something you have?

Drew Cramer (01:04:01.103)
huh. In order to grow more fruit.

Drew Cramer (01:04:09.84)
we need 18 leaves per vine. That's it.

Drew Cramer (01:04:16.813)
We just have the prototype put together so we're gonna... It needs to be warm out for it to work because we don't have it in a heated area. So we're gonna spool that up this year and see if we can make some gas. It's just in like an IBC tote. It's a small like 275 gallon tote to prototype it.

Andrew Mefferd (01:04:29.615)
That's cool.

Andrew Mefferd (01:04:38.149)
Is that a commercial system that you bought from somewhere?

Drew Cramer (01:04:42.093)
There's a university nearby with lots of engineering students and one of them, one of the groups for their senior project was working on this. So it's like a do-it-yourself kind of version to IBC tote with three two inch PVC pipes sticking out of it and a couple elbows and valves and then I will buy there's like a bag, a specific bag that you can buy for it that is durable enough to hold the gas.

Andrew Mefferd (01:05:07.422)
Interesting, is it it propane that's actually methane or am I?

Drew Cramer (01:05:16.301)
So propane is like a natural gas product and methane is like often a byproduct from like animal manure and stuff and very large agricultural facilities will have biomethane digesters to make the

Andrew Mefferd (01:05:24.293)
Yeah, okay.

Drew Cramer (01:05:31.245)
because methane is also, what is it, like 40 times more potent as a greenhouse gas than CO2. So if you can have operations that are already creating methane and then capture the methane and then burn it for heating applications, the CO2 that then is released is less potent of a greenhouse gas than the methane that would have been produced. But when you get into like the huge industrial scale agriculture, there are other...

Andrew Mefferd (01:05:36.164)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:05:49.08)
Okay.

Drew Cramer (01:05:55.382)
ramifications of running these giant biomethane digesters. So it's not a technology without problems.

Andrew Mefferd (01:06:02.562)
Yeah. Okay, because that's what like I've heard here. I think I've heard of dairies. They'll have digesters and stuff like that. Okay, because this is sounds like what you're describing a smaller, like smaller scale more appropriately sized probably for a lot of our listeners than a like what they're they're doing at dairies and things like that.

Drew Cramer (01:06:18.667)
Yeah, there's a gap in the existing technology. that's part of the reason why the students were interested in it is like it exists at like the dairy scale, like, and also like wastewater treatment facility scale. like tens of thousands of gallons to be produced. And it exists in less developed countries in like the kitchen scale, like just to produce enough gas to cook with. But there's nothing in between.

Andrew Mefferd (01:06:40.345)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (01:06:46.515)
and they're generally not available in the United States at the small scale. trying to figure out like is there a size of a digester where we can use the waste products of our farm to make some portion of the gas that we use. Because like we currently go through thousands of gallons of propane, which is a lot, and it would take a lot to produce that. But what would it take to offset a quarter of that maybe, or like some percentage of it?

Andrew Mefferd (01:06:50.307)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:07:03.001)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:07:12.268)
Yeah, very cool. So how do you get the methane from the digester back into where you're burning it?

Drew Cramer (01:07:22.561)
Yeah, it's a they have like bag collection systems and so like the piping comes out of the digester and you collect it in a bag and then you could detach that bag and then pressurize that to put it back into a burner. So it's a pretty small technology retrofit to change something from burning propane to burning methane. I don't think you haven't looked into the engineering specifically, but I think it's a fairly small tweak to make your everyday propane burner be able to burn methane.

I don't know what quantities of methane we actually are talking about, what quantities of storage container to make this feasible. Still figuring all that out.

Andrew Mefferd (01:07:59.171)
Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's very cool. I want to let's let's let's do another interview in a year or two. And when you have some like feelings about this technology and because I'm very interested in this because, you know, I'm a big greenhouse nerd. I love greenhouse growing. Like my like my biggest problem with greenhouse growing is just how much energy it all it all takes. Right. And so I figure but, you know,

I also figure that making things more efficient is just the way everything's going. Even people who don't care how much carbon they're emitting, like most greenhouse growers, talk to labor is the number one input and energy is the number two. So even if people don't care about how much they're burning, they can see they can save a lot of money. So I feel like...

you know, like the price people are getting for tomatoes hasn't really changed a whole lot for many years. And so I feel like the tweaks that are happening, you know, on the greenhouse industry side of things are a lot of them are just efficiency things. You know, it's like the price, the price we're getting paid hasn't changed a whole lot. So there's a lot of effort into, into making things more, more efficient, which is like the way the industry needs to go. So.

That's very exciting. I've never heard of what you're describing. I'll be very interested to see how that works out.

Drew Cramer (01:09:27.533)
Yeah, it's definitely early stage of figuring out if this is feasible. The appropriate technology doesn't currently exist. Can it exist someday? Because we do care about the greenhouse gas emissions of our farm. I'd like for humans to be to live on this planet for a few more generations at least. But when it comes down to it and we started farming and we were space limited,

Andrew Mefferd (01:09:44.452)
you

Drew Cramer (01:09:51.926)
tomatoes and hothouse crops were the most value-dense thing we could grow. And so like the question is, I want to make a living farming, I want to feed my community. I couldn't do that without a heated greenhouse initially with the design parameters of my space. And so is it worth it to make my living farming if it means I need to burn this much fuel? And like how do I weigh those different considerations?

like the value of small-scale farming? Big question.

Andrew Mefferd (01:10:25.09)
Yeah. Well, no, think you're wrestling with a question that so many other growers are, of course, because, yeah, I I got two kids. I definitely worry about what state the world will be in, you know, by the time they're adults, let alone their kids. so I don't know. I know what you mean, because I mean, almost no industry. I'm sure if we thought really hard, we could think of some industry that doesn't

like doesn't use fossil fuels in some way. I mean, that's the, you know, the state that we find ourselves in is that they are hooked into almost every, almost every facet of our lives. And so, yeah, I think it, the question at this point is like, how do we make everything more efficient and, know, potentially eliminate, you know, with an eye to elimination as much as possible. But yeah, in the meantime, in the meantime, we gotta grow.

So.

Drew Cramer (01:11:23.863)
Well, and like as a small-scale grower, most of us go into this for values. Like we're not becoming farmers because we want to get rich. We're becoming farmers because we're trying to do good for the world. We're not happy with the industrial agricultural system. We're not happy with the poison that's put into the earth. Like we're trying to do good. And so the question is like how can we actually measure that on our farm?

like okay it's good to have that value and then it's good to have reality checks and like metrics to be like yes I'm doing good

Andrew Mefferd (01:11:57.713)
Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely. mean, I think, yeah, I like, I'm sure they're out there, but I have not I have yet to meet the farmer who's who got into it for because they love the business of farming or, you know, to get rich and obviously if

Drew Cramer (01:12:12.397)
I mean, a lot of farmers don't want to have a boss. Like we get in it for the small business reasons. Like, I like to be my own boss. I could solve my own problems. Like doing good is part of the motivation for sure. The farmers are a quirky bunch of people.

Andrew Mefferd (01:12:27.33)
Yes, that reminds me, I think there's a Wendell Berry quote that's something about like no bosses and no employees. like, yeah, I definitely know some people who've deliberately kept their farm small because they want to have like a one person farm or like a couple. just, I can think of a few. I know who just said like, we're going to do whatever we can do as two people because we don't want employees or bosses. yeah, think you're, yeah, the farmers are.

Drew Cramer (01:12:54.213)
I'm fine with not having a boss, but I love my employees. My niece are very grateful for them. I love, like especially like we have like seven part-time employees this year. I think we had six last year. And we go out in the field and some, got work share people that are volunteering too. We'll go out and like 12 people hit up the lettuce harvest. And it's like, wow, we just harvested 150 pounds of lettuce in an hour. Like, let's go. Like, or rock.

Andrew Mefferd (01:13:01.603)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:13:15.908)
Yeah, yeah, that's amazing

Drew Cramer (01:13:21.941)
rock picking days? Like, okay, we all picked rock for two hours. I used to do this for a whole week by myself. I love my employees.

Andrew Mefferd (01:13:30.262)
Yeah, Well, yeah, like, don't get me wrong. saying like, I mean, that's, that's one of the nice things about farming is it's customizable, right? Is that you can, like, you can make if you want to have your if you want to have a one person farm, great. If you want to have a couple farm, great. But I also think, yeah, like, I mean, I, I think that's a pretty common thing to like, it's also changes over time. Like, I remember thinking, like, you know, kind of like that, like, we'll do whatever my wife and I, whatever we can do.

Drew Cramer (01:13:37.409)
Yes, yes.

Andrew Mefferd (01:13:57.058)
But then that equation changed when we had kids. And then we realized, one of the things that holding our farm back is not having employees. If we had just a little more labor, we could do this other market or something like that. I guess I see the appeal, because that appealed to me, that there's a million ways to set up your farm. I mean, one thing we used to say is just that there's as many ways to farm as there are farmers. And so.

I think that's just the customizable aspect of it is people can, if they can figure out how to make it, make a profit, they can set up their farm however they please.

Drew Cramer (01:14:37.165)
yeah, there's definitely no one way right way to farm. Like there are millions of farmers in the United States and every farm is unique. Like, and that's not an understatement. Like you take a deck of cards, 52 cards, there's more ways to arrange those cards than there are stars in existence. And there are more than 52 variables on any given farm. So yes, every farm is unique.

Andrew Mefferd (01:14:57.751)
Ha ha ha ha ha.

Yeah, yeah, absolutely. Which is one of the things I love about farming. I mean, it just keeps it interesting. I'll think like, you can't do it like that. And then I'll meet somebody who's doing it like that. You know what I mean? It's like, I guess I was wrong. So I mean, it's one of those things. I feel like there's a lifetime of just interest between nature and how people are doing it all that kind of stuff. That's certainly what's agriculture interesting for me.

However, on the not unique side of things, like you're talking about doing the math and figuring that greenhouse tomatoes were the most, you know, like remunerative crop or what, you know, however you want to put it. like I, I don't think I've mentioned this interview, know, part of the reason that Guillaume put me in touch with you is because Guillaume and I are working on a greenhouse growing video course. you know, I think my.

I wanted to focus on the eight most important greenhouse crops. then Guillaume was like, let's just focus on the most important one, tomatoes. And I was like, yeah, okay, that makes sense. And that's where he put me in touch with you because he was like, I was trying to get an idea of how Guillaume works with people. And he was like, well, why don't you talk to Drew? He could just tell you about it. We had a lot of really good luck with Drew.

because our plan is to release this course in weekly installments and we wanna make it free and available to the whole Growing for Market audience. it's something we're working on how we're gonna do that, we're hoping in May to have the first installments of this course and also make it free for the Orisha audience. the thing is if you're Growing for Market subscriber or an Orisha customer, you'll basically get these installments.

Andrew Mefferd (01:16:59.639)
that when we're done, it'll make a greenhouse growing course. And he picked tomatoes because that's, I mean, that's pretty classic is that, like so many farms like may grow a lot of other things, but as you know, like greenhouse tomatoes are.

Drew Cramer (01:17:04.994)
Nice.

Andrew Mefferd (01:17:21.247)
And tomatoes in general, including greenhouse or one of the biggest, I'd say money makers on a lot of diverse market farms. mean, maybe a close second with like, cut greens, like lettuce or greens in any form. But the idea is that we're starting with tomatoes and going to eventually do other crops just because tomatoes are so particularly important to people. figured like, we should start out with, of course,

an especially important crop and then go from there.

Drew Cramer (01:17:54.478)
Well, and if you're managing your greenhouse for ideal production of tomatoes, like that does work pretty darn well for most other crops. Like I grow my cucumbers in my tomato house and I grew almost 3,000 pounds of cucumbers off of two 70 foot beds last year. So they're doing good in a tomato house.

Andrew Mefferd (01:18:12.897)
Yeah, that sounds good. Yeah. Well, that's a that's I'm glad you brought that up because I think like there are of course, I'm sure this is not a surprise to you or probably anybody else.

You know, on the bigger scale of things, lot of the really big greenhouses in North America and the world for that matter do well just like specialize in one crop. And part of it is because they will have a custom, you know, like cucumber program for the cucumber house. But that's a really good. Yeah, like that's a really good point you make is that's what I would tell people if if they're going to mix crops, be it, you know, tomatoes and cucumbers, tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers and eggplant. Like each one of those crops, if you.

If you were going to grow all one of them, you would run a slightly different temperature program for each of those different crops. that's mostly what I see is that most people like if you have a mixed crop greenhouse, set the program for the most the most important crop, which is probably tomatoes. You know, if tomatoes in the mix, it's tomatoes and that those other crops do fine in a greenhouse that's running a tomato program, which I actually don't know if.

You know if Arisha is you're running a like a tomato specific program or just like a greenhouse program, but Yeah, okay, so it's yeah, it's like anything else in life I feel like we're in the age of like specialization like like we know so much about so many things at this point You can get like almost as specialized as you have an appetite for so yeah, like that's a really good point in like big

Drew Cramer (01:19:32.813)
slicer tomato specific.

Andrew Mefferd (01:19:50.486)
like big greenhouses that grow like those tomatoes on the vine, you know, that you see the four or five cluster tomatoes that's still on the vine. Like they'll have a program specific to cluster tomatoes. If you see a go into a big greenhouse that's growing cherry or grape tomatoes, they will be running a cherry or grape program, which is very similar, you know, similar to like a slicer program. But that, yeah, that's,

Drew Cramer (01:20:12.009)
I think there's like a couple little tweaks that you make between them but and it can it matters it's like when you are at high levels of production if you change production by five percent that's a lot of fruit at the end of the year.

Andrew Mefferd (01:20:16.322)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:20:25.271)
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's a really good point. Because once you've optimized all the other stuff, like the stuff that we optimized in the early days of once you get the right number of plants in there and have ventilation worked out and stuff like that, hopefully you've raised your numbers a lot. so then that extra 5 or 10 % or something like that would be the icing on the cake. Or an interesting thing about grafting, actually, is that the...

Drew Cramer (01:20:37.9)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:20:56.139)
I would say that grafting, like, I mean, I'm a huge fan of grafting. I I ran a bunch of trials when I was working at Johnny's of grafted plants versus un-grafted plants. I mean, there's times when like the grafting isn't good, you know, but all my trials, the grafted plants always out yielded the grafted, the grafted plants always out yielded the un-grafted plants. And I'd say that grafting also is a technology that makes a bigger difference the rougher your conditions are.

So like if you're growing in an unheated hoop house in soil where the fertility isn't perfect, would see that grafted plants make more like a 20 to 50 % yield boost than like a really fancy greenhouse that has really good climate control, you know, like hydroponics or just good soil fertility. They've almost like, you're getting more like, probably more like a five or 10 % yield boost out of grafting. But.

So you might say like, why would they go to all the trouble of grafting if they're only getting that extra five or 10 %? Well, it's because they've already optimized everything else. So it's five or 10 % of a very big number, right? And so that's why there is kind of like this law of diminishing returns where the fancier and more dialed in your setup is you're going to get less and less benefits from grafting, but it is augmenting.

an already big number. So that's why people, that's why people in most of the people who are growing in big green houses, tomatoes are, are still grafting those plants, even though they're only getting like five or 10 % more out of it.

Drew Cramer (01:22:35.853)
Yeah. In 2024, we had a problem with our healing chamber and we lost a lot of our grafted plants. So it made it that we actually got to do a side-by-side comparison of grafted versus non-grafted plants. And that's when we had automated environmental controls. And so was like things were pretty dialed in and we saw 15 % more production on the grafted plants than the non-grafted. And that, the...

Andrew Mefferd (01:22:43.757)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:00.919)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (01:23:03.145)
non-grafted were also functionally two weeks older. So they had a longer fruiting season and still less production than the grafted plants. And cucumbers we even noticed like a bigger difference. I think we had double production on our cucumber plants compared to our non-grafted cucumber plants. It was a small sample size for that one because we had like a horrible death rate in grafting one year for that when we had the side by side. So we

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:12.427)
Yeah. Okay, well-

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:28.341)
Uh-huh.

Drew Cramer (01:23:32.065)
We do all grafted on our cuques and our tomatoes. Because also it's a question of like, when do I want to do the work? It's like, yeah, I can spend an extra day grafting tomatoes in February. Like I'd rather not be at the computer that day anyway. So maybe I don't want to spend an extra day grafting if I had to do that in the middle of May planting, but that extra work is happening before crunch time.

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:36.897)
Well...

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:41.059)
Hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:46.563)
Yeah

Andrew Mefferd (01:23:57.419)
Yeah, yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Well, that's super interesting to me that you're grafting all your cucumbers too. Are you using Tetsukubudo or Tetsukubudo for the rootstock? Osuke. So people aren't familiar. Tetsukubudo is actually an inner specific cross of, I think it's Pippo and Moshada. So basically it's a winter squash species. Tetsukubudo is a variety people can

Drew Cramer (01:24:05.933)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (01:24:27.978)
It's on the market. I think some places it's sold specifically as grafting root stock. also grow it. I actually grew some Tetsukubudo in the field, on its own non-grafted Tetsukubudo. More because, yeah, I had grafted with it and I realized just last season I grew some Tetsukubudo, kind of hard to say, in the field because...

Drew Cramer (01:24:41.867)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:24:54.974)
It's a nice winter squash. mean, like I heard apparently it's really popular in Brazil. I don't know. mean, you get this. So we got. Yeah, yeah, basically comes out as as a yeah. Yeah, it's like a yeah, it's basically like a little it's a lot like a little buttercup squash is what you end up getting, even though it's technically a hybrid between I think it's people and Machada. So Machada is like the the butternut family and people is is the.

Drew Cramer (01:25:02.301)
kabocha style squash right?

Andrew Mefferd (01:25:24.064)
I think what the buttercup, it's a family. can go look up, I mean, people can go look up their winter squash families, but I think that's one of the reasons that they use it for rootstock because as an inner specific cross, you tend to get more vigor. The wider you make a cross in plant genetics, you tend to get more vigor. And so I think that's why it's more vigorous than your average grafting.

grafting a cucumber into a random winter squash because it is that inner specific. This is not genetic modification, it's just birds and the bees. The bee visits a peepo and then goes to a moshotter. Obviously for the productions, they're probably having people do hand pollinations. I just didn't want people... If people weren't familiar with that technology, think there's a lot of...

Drew Cramer (01:26:01.745)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (01:26:08.555)
Yeah, the B is a Q-tip or whatever.

Andrew Mefferd (01:26:18.419)
I personally am concerned with genetic modification too. I didn't want people to think that I was, I want to be clear about when there's traditional plant breeding going on versus,

Drew Cramer (01:26:30.753)
Yeah, there's confusion surrounding cross, hybrid, and GMO.

Andrew Mefferd (01:26:35.297)
Yeah. So, okay. Well, that's really interesting to me that you got that much more yield off of the Tetsuku Budo because like years ago, I had done some grafting with cucumbers and some, I think I did some Tetsuku Budo and there were some specialized cucumber root stocks that were coming out of some of the companies in Europe. And I did not get a lot of yield out of the special cucumber varieties. And I think they are also,

those varieties were more bred for some some soil borne diseases that they were having problems with cucumbers in Europe and Asia because they What I was told why all these European companies were developing them even though they weren't we weren't seeing a lot of yield boosters because they have a much more limited land base in Europe and Asia as you know as far as like like

A lot of the good vegetable growing ground has been grown on for generations there already. There's not really a lot of places to expand to there. so the ground is probably full of the diseases that whatever, if you're growing melons or cucumbers or whatever, they probably already have all the diseases. they're having to use root stocks as a nonchemical way of getting around soil borne diseases. that's kind of like, I mean, this is back when I was...

working for Johnny's so I talked to these seed companies I was like, I don't really think that cucumber rootstocks are gonna catch on in North America until unless somebody has really bad disease problems until you can get that yield boost because I think that's what like disease resistance is great for the tomatoes but it's also like the yield, I think people almost like come for the, what is it, come for the yield.

boost and stay for the disease resistance or it's like, mean, a way, one way I put it to people is like, the way you find out if you have soil borne diseases is a bad way. You know, it's like you noticing your plants dying, right? So to my like, what I tend to tell people is that I feel like grafting is worth doing if only for the yield boost. And then the thing is like, okay, so another thing going along with what you said about like figuring out that the greenhouse tomatoes were one of your most lucrative crops is a lot of

Andrew Mefferd (01:28:50.772)
a lot of people are in the tomato, tomato, tomato, you know, rotation, right? I mean, everybody knows it's best to rotate crops, but like if tomatoes are your most important crop and you have one hoop house, you're probably growing tomatoes in there every year, right? And so that's just, you know, everybody knows that's an easy way to build up soy borne diseases by growing the same crop in the same soil every year. And so to my mind is like the yield boost makes it worth it.

Drew Cramer (01:28:55.757)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (01:29:18.686)
And the disease resistance that you get from tomatoes using grafted tomatoes just means that you're probably going to get diseases eventually if you're growing tomatoes in any ground year after year. And it just means that they won't show up if they eventually do, if you're grafting. I think that just the yield boost makes it worth the trouble in the first place. then the disease resistance is just nice insurance.

Drew Cramer (01:29:49.87)
Like, if you're at all space limited, like we are, we have one heated greenhouse, if you can make your tomatoes 15 % more productive, like, it just makes sense. Especially like we're already burning the same amount of propane. So if you're gonna have an environmentally controlled greenhouse and you're not adding 15 % to your production, I just don't know. Strong advocate for grafting in a controlled environment greenhouse.

Andrew Mefferd (01:30:11.69)
Yeah. yeah, yeah, well, I mean...

Andrew Mefferd (01:30:18.402)
Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely. Well, yeah, I mean, I've gotten that question, too, of people like, well, I'm getting enough. I'm getting as many tomatoes as I want. So like, why would I graft? And I'm like, well, you could like graft and then get rid of a row and plant still have enough tomatoes and plant something else there. So, you know, ultimately, like, you know, it's it's an individual decision. People can like people can do whatever they like. But I just think like in every trial I ever ran, the grafted plants always did better. I mean, that's that's why we did it on our own.

farm. actually talk about impromptu experiments like with your plants that didn't survive. We converted over to grafted plants in the greenhouse pretty quickly, but we were unconvinced on the benefits of grafting in the field. so one year I was going to graft. We mostly

stopped growing large fruited tomatoes in the field because it's so, know, we're up here in Maine, we have such a short season area. feel like temperatures start to drop off again by, you know, big like beefsteak fruits take so long, like 60 ish days to mature in most cases. Right. So I felt like we were already starting to cool off at the end of the summer by the time like our our large fruited tomatoes. Yeah, we're we're we're starting to ripen it. So I felt like it was not really economic to grow.

large fruited tomatoes in the field anymore. So we had already pretty much switched over to growing just cherry tomatoes and grape tomatoes out in the field. And so one year I tried to graft up a bunch of our cherry and grape tomatoes and I forget if some of them, if we had a disaster and some of them died or what, but whatever the cases we went in, we planted the field with part grafted tomatoes and part un-grafted tomatoes. And one thing that we noticed is the...

The planets just had a much stronger and resilient constitution because what happened is when we started to have those cold nights at the end of the season, the cherries and grapes that weren't grafted really slowed down all of a sudden. And it's like the grafted cherry and grape tomatoes just kept going until it got really cold. so that, you know, like that was one that was, you know, I mean, that probably helps.

Drew Cramer (01:32:33.857)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:32:39.65)
build up those yield numbers. mean, granted in a heated greenhouse, you're making the temperature right, as far as things, that was one thing that we noticed that we didn't necessarily anticipate was just how much longer the grafted plants kept pushing fruit after the optimal field conditions had passed in the fall than their un-grafted neighbors. So once again, loving the grafting.

Andrew Mefferd (01:33:14.978)
I guess I wanted to ask, when you started doing all the automated temperature control in your greenhouses, you notice any changes in quality, like the amount of number ones versus number twos or anything like that? Or is it just just volume?

Drew Cramer (01:33:36.43)
Yeah, well we don't have many problems with splitting. We have very few problems with blossom and rot. So we... when do we get number twos? We get so few number twos. Like almost everything that comes out of the greenhouse goes to market. We have a small pile of tomatoes but usually that's because somebody dropped it on the ground and we're like alright don't sell tomatoes that have been dropped on the ground.

Andrew Mefferd (01:33:51.007)
Okay, so-

Andrew Mefferd (01:33:58.477)
Mm-hmm.

Drew Cramer (01:33:59.618)
We did when we had the bacterial spot issue that made the plants that had those cherry tomatoes tasted really watery. They didn't have much flavor to them. So since we don't have problems with that disease anymore, we don't have that issue of having a flavor problem.

Andrew Mefferd (01:34:06.69)
Mm. Uh-huh.

Andrew Mefferd (01:34:13.74)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (01:34:15.881)
and our tomatoes taste great. I didn't like tomatoes until I was like 20 years old and then I tasted a farm fresh tomato. I don't eat tomatoes for like seven months out of the year because it's just not where they taste like watery disappointment. So like our, there's no decreasing quality for increasing the health of the plants.

Andrew Mefferd (01:34:30.998)
Yeah, yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:34:39.618)
Okay, well at the very least, yeah that's good to know since in most cases people are choosing a farmer based on how good it tastes.

Drew Cramer (01:34:48.717)
Yeah, most of our sales are, I guess, markets are about half of our sales and so it's people who are choosing to be repeat customers because they like the taste of our food.

And we mostly grow high loom varieties, varieties that are bred from heirlooms, but then with disease resistance as well. I think, let's see, what do we eat? We keep tweaking it a little bit year after year. This year we're growing, let me look it up actually. whoa.

Andrew Mefferd (01:35:17.866)
Yeah, what are you growing?

Drew Cramer (01:35:25.761)
Bumbolia. Bumbolia. I think that's the pink tomato we're growing this year. We had been growing damsel, but its production numbers weren't up there. We grow hot streak. A lot of commercial growers don't seem to grow hot streak. It's an orange and yellow striped tomato with a good disease resistance profile. Prolific producer, delicious, and looks amazing on the table.

We have trouble selling funny looking tomatoes with our markets. People are like, yellow tomato, black tomato, but the striped tomato, people love the striped tomato. People love the classic red tomato. So we're going to give Rabilski another try this year. We had been growing Ruby Dawn, but Ruby Dawn's production numbers didn't stay. It produced kind of early and it petered off for us.

Andrew Mefferd (01:35:57.762)
you

Drew Cramer (01:36:15.083)
We gave Rableski an unfair shot in 2023. That was the year our greenhouse flooded and our Rableskis were in a wetter patch of the greenhouse and were literally underwater for like weeks and never recovered from that. And I was like, these Rableskis, they're so weak. They can't grow after being drowned for weeks. So we're going to give them another shot as our red slicer.

Andrew Mefferd (01:36:27.488)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:36:35.106)
Yeah, can take it you're off the island well, that's good I I rebel ski is one of my longtime favorites I mean, I like it a lot. think

got a lot of the things you would want in a greenhouse tomato as far as like the right disease resistance is. think it's really pretty. I think it's prettier than a lot. You I mean, you've grown it before, you know, but for the people who may not have it, it has like a nicely ribbed whereas a lot like it's a true it's like the thing that I liked about Rebelski is that it had all the like disease package you would want for a greenhouse tomatoes for like leaf mold in in particular is one thing, you know, like was very important for us.

but it had like a nicer look, you know, and that varies by market too. Cause I know some markets want a smooth tomato. Our market seemed to appreciate, like I liked the slight irregularity of the look of Riebelski with that ribbed top. And another thing is I thought the flavor was actually pretty good for a, I mean, Riebelski is a true greenhouse tomato, but I think it's kind of like, it's also kind of.

A typical for a greenhouse tomato as far as the ribbing like I think that's part of the ribelski like Then like it's not a coincidence that has rebel in the name You know, I think I think that's one that did that like was kind of A typical for greenhouse tomatoes like as far as a greenhouse tomato goes. It's a little little bit of a maverick but Like actually I like to rebel skill. I I still do and I definitely I mean so the interesting thing

you mentioning of it not being able to hack it after it got flooded out. I will say, I've definitely, in fact, I added Rubellsky to the catalog. I trialed Rubellsky and I added it to the Johnny's catalog. And I have talked to people who don't like it. And I'm totally respectful of that. But one of the things about it is it's a very strong tomato. so there's this whole group, we kind of call them like

Drew Cramer (01:38:28.471)
Yeah

Andrew Mefferd (01:38:41.973)
high tech varieties or Dutch varieties versus lower tech or like Spanish or Mexican varieties. And so this is a distinction that you'll see like in the greenhouse breeding industry is that actually the very, the reason we call like the some varieties like Dutch or high tech varieties, they're actually tend to be weaker.

then varieties like Rubellsky, would say, is more like a Spanish or Mexican low tech greenhouse variety because in very high tech greenhouse growing like they do in Holland, they've optimized all the factors already so much. They actually want a weaker variety to be able to control it more because the very strong varieties, when you have everything like fertility and temperature,

Drew Cramer (01:39:24.322)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:39:33.986)
All optimized they can get to to vegetative, right? This stem will get really thick the leaves will get really big and that all comes at the cost of fruit production like if if anybody's ever grown a tomato in a like a volunteer tomato in a compost pile and that they're all leaf and no fruit like that's what's going on and so so Rabelewski has a tendency to go a little too strong for you know, Dutch style growers or like who have everything everything really optimized and so I

I talked to some people, definitely talked to some people who don't like Rabelsky because they said it got just too vigorous on them. so that's it's interesting to me. It couldn't survive the flood. so I do do wonder because you're know, you're deaf like with your Ericia system, you're definitely like like approaching high tech and because there's this whole market like. You know, in the in the industry, they'll call them.

Drew Cramer (01:40:11.167)
You

Andrew Mefferd (01:40:29.161)
low tech or Spanish or Mexican varieties, not because both cultures speak Spanish. It's because there's this like think about in Holland, it's not real warm. There's not a whole lot of light through a lot of the years. And so they build these very high tech, like the, you know, the tall, tall glass greenhouses that people will see, you know, if they've seen pictures of Dutch greenhouse growing, whereas in the like Southern Spain, like you can Google Earth it.

the province of Almeria in southern Spain, you can see the greenhouses from space. It's an area, it's kind of like a desert area. They're capitalizing on the same growing principles as you would in the Southwest of the United States or like any, people may know there's a lot of deserts around the world that are very productive agriculturally if you can get the water there, right? And so,

Drew Cramer (01:41:02.381)
You

Drew Cramer (01:41:22.071)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:41:22.833)
They're doing they're using what they're doing is instead of the big like glass greenhouses with a lot of bells and whistles like they do in Holland in Southern Spain and Mexico You're good. We got we got to we got two channels so he can you're good. Yeah, yeah Goff away. So what they're doing instead of it's stuff like in Holland where they have the big glass greenhouses with all the bells and whistles Making a slightly less optimal environment

Drew Cramer (01:41:34.765)
Okay. I cough away.

Andrew Mefferd (01:41:50.849)
really good for tomatoes. What they're doing in the south of Spain and in Mexico is they're building polytunnels, less fancy structures, and they're making use of the fact they have a much better climate. They've got a lot more light. They've got a lot more heat units in the south of Spain or in Mexico, and that's why industry-wide, if you were talking to a variety consultant from a European seed company or something, they'd probably think of like,

Are you more like growing in a Dutch greenhouse with a lot of bells and whistles? Are you growing in more like a simpler greenhouse? And so they'll give you they'll give you stronger varieties that are stronger growers like Rabelsky for one of those for the like the simpler poly tunnels because because things just aren't quite as optimized. Like they don't have quite they don't tend to have as fancy climate control situations. And so when plants if you can't give the plant the the

the best atmosphere possible. That's stress. Just like we were talking earlier about like, like plants don't want these huge temperature swings. Like, well, if you're relying more on your natural environment to give the plants that and you're not controlling it precisely the way that Dutch greenhouse growers are, your plants are still going to experience that stress. Like say when you have a cold night, like a lot of deserts have cold nights and warm days. And so you, you need a stronger variety.

to overcome that stress because that's what, if you have a weak variety, it'll tend to lose energy as the season goes on. But if you have a really strong variety like Rubellsky, it can just like mortar right through that stress and keep on going. So we'll have to, in a year or two, we'll have to do another interview. We can talk about your methane digester and we can talk about how, whether Rubellsky worked out for you or not. I think it's going to be good, but I've definitely talked to people who didn't love it.

Drew Cramer (01:43:44.737)
It comes highly recommended from a lot of people, so we'll see if drowning it for weeks on end was not a fair trial. It never recovered.

Andrew Mefferd (01:43:50.273)
Yeah, there's maybe a little too much with the whole drowning. But but okay. Well, I mean, that kind of brings us around and actually, know, Drew, that is that's really the questions that I had prepared for you. So I want to ask if there's anything that I should have asked you or let me particularly about the greenhouse.

Like anything else you did, you know, I'm thinking like that's, you know, if you could, we're able to increase your production by two and a half percent. mean, like that's, that's amazing. Like that's, that's all anybody can ask for. Is there anything else that contributed to that or anything else you want to say before we let you go?

Drew Cramer (01:44:34.893)
250 % was the starting point. We're still increasing year over year. what are we up to? I've got numbers somewhere. Our slicer tomatoes now produce 350 % more than they did compared to 2033 or 2023. And we're up to almost five pounds per square foot. And we're trying to hit six pounds per square foot this year. We were at just.

Andrew Mefferd (01:45:00.703)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (01:45:02.091)
just around a pound per square foot with slicers in 2023. And that was still like, we were one of the better tomato producers in the area. so pretty, like our tomato production wasn't abysmal compared to standard, simple tomato growing methods. So it's, yeah, you can keep improving.

Andrew Mefferd (01:45:14.399)
Yeah.

Drew Cramer (01:45:25.643)
lots of incremental improvements always learning always trying to figure out how to make it just a little bit better five percent better every year

Andrew Mefferd (01:45:34.59)
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. There's a yeah, there's a lot of leeway there. mean, like people, I don't know, people's people's yields are all over the place. But like kind of like we were talking about earlier about how that keeps it interesting. You know, it's like every year there's a new variety. There's a new technique you can, know, and then and then of course, the weather throws those curveballs, you know, so, you know, some years the weather may take a chunk out of that yield. But, you know, I feel like that is that is one of the

interesting things about playing the game, know, is that you like every season is a different chance and to like, like, like, this year was good, but I wonder, you know, try this new variety or try this new thing that I heard about, see, see if that brings it up or brings it down. And, you know, it's just like a continuous learning and improvement process, which is keeps it interesting for me.

Drew Cramer (01:46:14.666)
you

Drew Cramer (01:46:27.413)
Yeah, we're trying a new yellow cherry tomato called Star Lore. The seeds were like two dollars a seed or something. It's crazy. But we only bought...

Andrew Mefferd (01:46:34.816)
Wow. Yeah, that's, yeah, that's pretty expensive. But it's, mean, like, I don't know, it's, it's worth it. As long as the variety is good, it's worth it because I know most, most farms, um, and keep in mind, I don't work for a seed company anymore. So, you know, like most farms, the seed, the seed budget is not a huge part of the whole. And so it's like, if, you know, think of

Drew Cramer (01:46:57.389)
Yeah. Our seed budget's like 3 % of our budget.

Andrew Mefferd (01:47:00.864)
Yeah. So it's, get it. It can be hard to spend like a dollar or two, you know, per seed, but like one way I think about it, you know, one way I tell people is, well, is they try things, right? Cause I've talked to a lot of people who are growing like big beef or, know, like whatever their favorite field variety is in the greenhouse. And so I'm like, okay, don't take it from me. Do you know, do a little trial by a packet of those expensive greenhouse seeds and

You know, it's like, if, if let's say you're getting big beef for like a quarter of a seed, I don't know what the price on big beef is anymore. It's a quarter seed, diamond seed or something like that. And you're paying a dollar a seed, even $2 a seed for a greenhouse tomato. Well, if that greenhouse variety can be 10 % more productive or an even bigger thing at least is like, like we, we had this honeymoon period where like the first three years that we grew in a greenhouse.

we didn't get leaf mold, but I think this is pretty like there's leaf mold and a couple other diseases that aren't often seen in the field that are like very common in greenhouses. once after, I think it was the third season when we got leaf mold, we just got it every year. Well, one of the big things is that all those field tomato varieties don't tend to have.

resistances to greenhouse diseases. so like in my mind, leaf mold is almost like the poster child for greenhouse diseases because like if I didn't like sometimes I get seed companies that were in a seed catalogs that were in a different language or something or and but they had the same disease codes, you know, and so like if I could look at it and tell it had leaf mold, I would think this is probably bred for a greenhouse because it's a you almost never see it in the field. It's almost never in field varieties, but it's in

most of the varieties that are bred for the greenhouse. so that, my point is if leaf mold, like that's part of the reason we only got half of the yield off of our heirlooms, even in the greenhouse as, as the, the greenhouse varieties, because if people haven't seen leaf mold, like at least for the time being, the resistance to leaf mold is perfect as far as, the, you know, like people may know a lot of plants will have intermediate resistance, meaning like the plant will get a,

Andrew Mefferd (01:49:15.796)
Pathogen it just won't die from it really fast whereas right now the leaf mold like I'm sure leaf mold the pathogen is out there mutating as we speak Gonna defeat it one day but right now the resistance for leaf mold are pretty perfect in that we would have a greenhouse where the Heirloom varieties were absolutely sliming down covered with leaf mold You know, there's spores blowing around the greenhouse and right next to them are pristine greenhouse varieties Which you know, we put chose because they had leaf mold

varieties and so my point was if you pick one more tomato off of say like your greenhouse variety then like Big beef or whatever your favorite field variety is that one tomato has paid the difference in the cost between your field tomato seed cost in your greenhouse tomato sauce And your greenhouse tomato cost and then every other tomato you pick off that expensive Greenhouse tomato plant is gravy. That's you know, like that's adding to your bottom line. So like

I try to help people get their heads around it. It's just a more specialized market too. People plant way more field tomatoes than they do greenhouse tomatoes. In addition to the fact that all the breeding for those greenhouse tomatoes was done in expensive greenhouses, they also just have to recoup their money. If people are planting a fraction of the number of greenhouse tomatoes as field tomatoes, they're going to have to make it more expensive to make it.

make it work out, but whatever. That's my...

Drew Cramer (01:50:45.805)
No, I value people that are putting in the work to grow varieties that work for the market gardener. we have specific design considerations that apply to the way we're trying to do business. So please, thank you.

Andrew Mefferd (01:50:52.36)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:51:01.056)
Yeah, that's that's a really good way to look at it is like somebody's got to develop those varieties and and they got to get paid too So I mean at the same time I hope that two dollar yellow cherry tomato is the most amazing thing

Drew Cramer (01:51:15.287)
fingers crossed man we've grown torrentina and we've grown sun gold and like our sun golds only produce sixty percent as much as our sakuras like vine per vine square foot per square foot like so we gotta do better than sixty percent otherwise I'm only growing red tomatoes and I like having a gold cherry tomato my customers love having a gold cherry tomato

Andrew Mefferd (01:51:26.089)
Mm-hmm.

Yeah. Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:51:36.516)
It's nice to have the mix. Yeah, yes. Sakura is a yeah, that's a great variety too. So which is so interesting because I tend to think of Sun Gold is a very vigorous variety. know, like I mean, I think it is Sun Gold's a great variety, but it's like I don't know if it's if it's, you know, growing in a greenhouse Sakura just like the greenhouse, you know, genetics out out yields it. I mean, like, in fact,

Drew Cramer (01:51:38.605)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:52:05.343)
That kind of reminds me of a quick story for you. like in all those trials, I did many trials of like I mentioned, of grafted tomatoes versus un-grafted. And so one year is sort of like a wringer or like I wanted to try to just dispel the notion that root stocks aren't special, that they're just like a really vigorous plant. And so I was like, I don't know.

Sun Gold is really vigorous. so I did one trial one year where I used Sun Gold as one of many root stocks and it wasn't very good as a root stock. The actual tomato root stocks beat the pants off of Sun Gold as a root stock because I had actually heard of people doing that sometimes who didn't want to shell out for actual tomato root stocks. Particularly if they knew they had soil borne diseases. And so they were trying to get the disease resistance that is in

Drew Cramer (01:52:32.973)
you

Drew Cramer (01:52:39.915)
You

Andrew Mefferd (01:53:01.071)
Rootstock tomatoes like people if if people have looked at them in the seed catalog They'll know like tomato rootstocks tend to have very extensive soil borne disease packages because that's all they're supposed to do is be vigorous and not get so born diseases and so So if you haven't if you haven't seen that go go look at some rootstocks in a catalog You'll see what I mean. They tend to have a ton of soil borne disease resistances, so I'd heard of people buying You know

field tomato varieties like verticillium or something, know, like, like a way for people to grow heirlooms. They would be grafting heirlooms onto like some verticillium resistant variety. And then so like, yeah, that probably works to get you around the disease resistance, but you know, those people are leaving yield on the table because the there's no like that's there's no because once again, because the tomato rootstocks are those inner specific crosses of like, you know, to

two different tomato species once again done by hand, not genetic modification. They have a ridiculous amount of hybrid vigor because they have inner specific hybrid vigor. It's the mule effect. I don't know how many people are familiar with mules these days, but one of the things about mules is because were, mules are an interspecific cross. So that's a very good example of an interspecific cross, no genetic modification needed, just the right...

The right donkey meets the right horse on the right day and you get a mule, you know, nine months later, whatever the gestation period is for a horse, right? So that's one of the reasons people liked mules is they, thought they were, like a lot of people thought they were stronger and more resilient than horses, probably due to the inner specific hybrid vigor of being a cross between a horse and a donkey. that's what you're getting when you're paying that extra money for those tomato root stocks is you're getting the mule of the vegetable world.

Drew Cramer (01:54:29.548)
you

Andrew Mefferd (01:54:52.891)
in your tomato root stocks or your tetsuku budo. So, okay. Well, Drew, this has been a really fun and interesting conversation. Actually, we're in a few places that I didn't even anticipate it going. So, but I know what time of year it is. I don't even know how long we've been talking, but I think it's been a good long while. So I also want to be respectful of your time and to say,

Drew Cramer (01:54:56.545)
Yeah.

Andrew Mefferd (01:55:22.353)
Unless there's anything else that you want to say, just let people know. If people want to look you up online or on social media, where they can find you in those places.

Drew Cramer (01:55:35.713)
Yeah, we're the only ghost house farm that I know of. If you look up ghost house farm and it doesn't look like a farm, you might be finding a haunted house in Indiana. yeah, ghost house farm on Facebook, Instagram, our website. We've got a newsletter where we tell you things every once in a while.

Andrew Mefferd (01:55:45.151)
haha

Andrew Mefferd (01:55:56.669)
And what farmers market are you? Actually, I I assume most people are on this podcast are farmers themselves, but I mean, just out of curiosity, which farmers market do you do?

Drew Cramer (01:56:07.627)
We go to the Calumet Market on Saturdays and the Houghton Market on Tuesdays. you're in the area, stop on by, say hello, we'd love to chat with you. Always love talking to other growers and just eaters. If you're just an eater listening to this podcast, I'd love to talk to you as well.

Andrew Mefferd (01:56:16.722)
Yeah?

Andrew Mefferd (01:56:22.782)
Yes, I mean I assume most people in our audience are either farmers or want to be, but you know we don't discriminate. There could be gardeners, there could be eaters, you know although I think it's just thoughtless is that farmers might want to come visit you in a couple months and buy a pint of your mixed cherry tomatoes to see how the yellow one turned out.

Drew Cramer (01:56:45.569)
we should have met the first market was that june six

Andrew Mefferd (01:56:50.62)
Yeah. that's great. Because yeah, I know like, okay.

Drew Cramer (01:56:53.591)
June 2nd. There we go. June 9th. Dates. Am I looking at the right? Yeah, we should have cherry tomatoes at the first farmers market on June 9th.

Andrew Mefferd (01:57:02.408)
Don't be there in June. do you remember what the yellow one is called? The yellow expensive one? that's Star-Lore, you said that, okay.

Drew Cramer (01:57:07.073)
Come on by.

Star Lore. Guillaume recommended it, so we're giving it a try.

Andrew Mefferd (01:57:17.278)
Star and it okay. Well, at least it has it at least it has a good name, you know

Drew Cramer (01:57:21.271)
Good name. I used to buy varieties just based off of name alone.

Andrew Mefferd (01:57:24.931)
Ha ha ha ha!

Drew Cramer (01:57:27.457)
That's why we've got hot streak.

Andrew Mefferd (01:57:29.208)
yes. Well, I know you've probably whittled the ones down that don't live up to their name, so...

Drew Cramer (01:57:37.069)
You keep whittling it down every year and then try something new and suddenly you've got variety bloat.

Andrew Mefferd (01:57:40.424)
Yes.

Andrew Mefferd (01:57:44.135)
Yeah, yeah. Alright, Star-Lore, first of his name. Okay, well, so they can come, yeah. if people are up on the UP, or maybe they're just going up there to visit, they can come by and try the Star-Lore and find out if it lives up to its name.

Drew Cramer (01:57:48.492)
you

Drew Cramer (01:58:04.193)
Yeah. Back to full circle conversations, the lake makes it so much more temperate here in the summer. So like everybody else gets like 100 degree heat waves, it's like 85 here and we're complaining. We're like, it's so hot. I get rarely above 85 in the Q &A. It's secretly an amazing place to vacation. Don't tell anybody.

Andrew Mefferd (01:58:10.579)
Yeah?

Andrew Mefferd (01:58:15.738)
Ha ha ha ha ha

Andrew Mefferd (01:58:26.43)
I mean, people already know the- I mean, isn't like, isn't like the upper, the peninsula, like, is it- am I wrong?

Drew Cramer (01:58:28.119)
Shh, keep it secret.

Drew Cramer (01:58:35.797)
Since COVID, people have been vacationing here more. Because when people switch to doing shorter distance vacations, when they quit traveling overseas or just going across the state, that's when our tourist numbers really jumped. Lake Superior is gorgeous. We've got tons of waterfalls. We have tons of natural beauty. It's cheaper to vacation here than most other parts of the country. We have a burgeoning food scene.

Andrew Mefferd (01:58:42.93)
Mm-hmm.

Andrew Mefferd (01:58:49.16)
Okay.

Drew Cramer (01:59:03.733)
I mean, it's awful. The Q &A was terrible. Nobody wants to come here. It's far from everything. Stay away.

Andrew Mefferd (01:59:08.722)
Yeah, don't, okay, because I thought I had heard of people, you know, vacationing up there, which I didn't know if that was like part of who you're selling to in the summer. But yes, don't, don't, yeah, take it from Drew. It's terrible. Don't, don't go up there. All right. Well, thank you so much, Drew. I really enjoyed this conversation. You are awesome. Thank you. Thank you so much for sharing.

You know, all this stuff with us, I really appreciate it. think our audience will too.

Drew Cramer (01:59:41.778)
It's been a genuine pleasure, Andrew. It's been great getting to know you, getting to hear about your experiences, and I'm really honored to be on the podcast.

Andrew Mefferd (01:59:48.828)
Well, we're are honored to have you because it's like I'm always blown away by how just like sharing the people in the GFM audience are and certainly applies to you. I've really enjoyed hearing about what you're doing up there. And so so thank you. It's been fun.

Drew Cramer (02:00:05.869)
Thanks. Bye.

Andrew Mefferd (02:00:06.908)
Alright, take care Drew.

